Beyond Good And Evil 
By: Friedrich Nietzsche 
 
Part One: On the Prejudices of Philosophers 
 
1 
 
The will to truth which will still tempt us to many a venture, that famous truthfulness of which 
all philosophers so far have spoken with respect - what questions has this will to truth not laid 
before us! What strange, wicked, questionable questions! That is a long story even now - and yet 
it seems as if it had scarcely begun. Is it any wonder that we should finally become suspicious, 
lose patience, and turn away impatiently? that we should finally learn from this Sphinx to ask 
questions, too? Who is it really that puts questions to us here? What in us really wants "truth"? 
Indeed we came to a long halt at the question about the cause of this will - until we finally came 
to a complete stop before a still more basic question. We asked about the value of this will. 
Suppose we want truth: why not rather untruth? and uncertainty? even ignorance? 
The problem of the value of truth came before us - or was it we who came before the problem? 
Who of us is Oedipus here? Who the Sphinx? It is a rendezvous, it seems, of questions and 
question marks. 
And though it scarcely seems credible, it finally almost seems to us as if the problem had never 
even been put so far - as if we were the first to see it, fix it with our eyes, and risk it. For it does 
involve a risk, and perhaps there is none that is greater. 
 
2 
 
"How could anything originate out of its opposite? for example, truth out of error? or the will to 
truth out of the will to deception? or selfless deeds out of selfishness? or the pure and sunlike 
gaze of the sage out of lust? Such origins are impossible; whoever dreams of them is a fool, 
indeed worse; the things of highest value must have another, peculiar origin - they cannot be 
derived from this transitory, seductive, deceptive, paltry world from this turmoil of delusion and 
lust. Rather from the lap of Being, the intransitory, the hidden god, the 'thing-in-itself' - there 
must be their basis, and nowhere else." 
This way of judging constitutes the typical prejudgment and prejudice which give away the 
metaphysicians of all ages; this kind of valuation looms in the background of all their logical 
procedures; it is on account of this "faith" that they trouble themselves about "knowledge," about 
something that is finally baptized solemnly as "the truth." The fundamental faith of the 
metaphysicians is the faith in opposite values. It has not even occurred to the most cautious 
among them that one might have a doubt right here at the threshold where it was surely most 
necessary - even if they vowed to themselves, "de omnibus dubitandum." 
For one may doubt, first, whether there are any opposites at all, and secondly whether these 
popular valuations and opposite values on which the metaphysicians put their seal, are not 
perhaps merely foreground estimates, only provisional perspectives perhaps even from some 
nook, perhaps from below, frog perspective as it were, to borrow an expression painters use. For 
all the value that the true, the truthful, the selfless may deserve, it would still be possible that a 
higher and more fundamental value for life might have to be ascribed to deception, selfishness, 
and lust. It might even be possible that what constitutes the value of these good and revered 
things is precisely that they are insidiously related, tied to and involved with these wicked, 
seemingly opposite things - maybe even one with them in essence. Maybe! 
But who has the will to concern himself with such dangerous maybes? For that, one really has to 
wait for the advent of a new species of philosophers such as have somehow another and converse 
taste and propensity from those we have known so far - philosophers of the dangerous "maybe" 
in every sense. 
And in all seriousness: I see such new philosophers coming up. 
 
3 
 
After having looked long enough between the philosopher's lines and fingers, I say to myself: by 
far the greater part of conscious thinking must still be included among instinctive activities, and 
that goes even for philosophical thinking. We have to relearn here, as one has had to relearn 
about heredity and what is "innate." As the act of birth deserves no consideration in the whole 
process and procedure of heredity, so "being conscious" is not in any decisive sense the opposite 
of what is instinctive: most of the conscious thinking of a philosopher is secretly guided and 
forced into certain channels by his instincts. 
Behind all logic and its seeming sovereignty of movement, too, there stand valuations or, more 
clearly, physiological demands for the preservation of a certain type of life. For example, that the 
definite should be worth more than the indefinite, and mere appearance worth less than "truth" - 
such estimates might be, in spite of their regulative importance for us, nevertheless mere 
foreground estimates, a certain kind of niaiserie which may be necessary for the preservation of 
just such beings as we are. Supposing, that is, that not just man is the "measure of things." 
 
4 
 
The falseness of a judgment is for us not necessarily an objection to a judgment; in this respect 
our new language may sound strangest. The question is to what extent it is life-promoting, life 
serving, species-preserving, perhaps even species-cultivating. And we are fundamentally inclined 
to claim that the falsest judgments (which include the synthetic judgments a priori) are the most 
indispensable for us; that without accepting the fictions of logic, without measuring reality 
against the purely invented world of the unconditional and self-identical, without a constant 
falsification of the world by means of numbers, man could not live - that renouncing false 
judgments would mean renouncing life and a denial of life. To recognize untruth as a condition 
of life - that certainly means resisting accustomed value feelings in a dangerous, way; and a 
philosophy that risks this would by that token alone place itself beyond good and evil. 
 
5 
 
What provokes one to look at all philosophers half suspiciously, half mockingly, is not that one 
discovers again and again how innocent they are - how often and how easily they make mistakes 
and go astray; in short, their childishness and childlikeness - but that they are not honest enough 
in their work, although they make a lot of virtuous noise when the problem of truthfulness is 
touched even remotely. They all pose as if they had discovered and reached their real opinions 
through the self-development cold, pure, divinely unconcerned dialectic (as opposed to the 
mystics of every rank, who are more honest and doltish - and talk of "inspiration"); while at 
bottom it is an assumption, a hunch, indeed a kind of "inspiration" - most often a desire of the 
heart that has been filtered and made abstract - that they defend with reasons they have sought 
after the fact. They are all advocates who resent that name, and for the most part even wily 
spokesmen for their prejudices which they baptize "truths" - and very far from having the 
courage of the conscience that admits this, precisely this, to itself; very far from having the good 
taste of the courage which also lets this be known, whether to warn an enemy or friend, or, from 
exuberance, to mock itself. 
The equally stiff and decorous Tartuffery of the old Kant as he lures us on the dialectical bypaths 
that lead to his "categorical imperative" - really lead astray and seduce - this spectacle makes us 
smile, as we are fastidious and find it quite amusing to watch closely the subtle tricks of old 
moralists and preachers of morals. Or consider the hocus-pocus of mathematical form with 
which Spinoza a clad his philosophy - really "the love of his wisdom," to render that word fairly 
and squarely - in mail and mask, to strike terror at the very outset into the heart of any assailant 
who should dare to glance at that invincible maiden and Pallas Athena: how much personal 
timidity and vulnerability this masquerade of a sick hermit betrays! 
 
6 
 
Gradually it has become clear to me what every great philosophy so far has been - namely, the 
personal confession of its author and a kind of involuntary and unconscious memoir; also that the 
moral (or immoral) intentions in every philosophy constituted the real germ of life from which 
the whole plant had grown. 
Indeed, if one would explain how the abstrusest metaphysical claims of a philosopher really 
came about, it is always well (and wise) to ask first: at what morality does all this (does he) aim? 
According, I do not believe that a "drive to knowledge" is the father of philosophy; but rather 
that another drive has, here as elsewhere employed understanding (and misunderstanding) as a 
mere instrument. But anyone who considers the basic drives of man to see to what extent they 
may have been at play just here as in inspiring spirits (or demons and kobolds) will find that all 
of them have done philosophy at some time - and that every single one of them would like only 
too well to represent just itself as the ultimate purpose of existence and the legitimate master of 
all the other drives. For every drive wants to be master - and it attempts to philosophize in that 
spirit. 
To be sure: among scholars who are really scientific men things may be different -"better," if you 
like - there you may really find something like a drive for knowledge, some small independent 
clockwork that, once well wound, works on vigorously without any essential participation from 
all the other drives of the scholar. The real "interests" of the scholar therefore lie usually 
somewhere else - say, in his family, or in making money, or in politics. Indeed, it is almost a 
matter of total indifference whether his little machine is placed at this or that spot in science, and 
whether the "promising" young worker turns himself into a good philologist or an expert on 
fungi or a chemist: it does not characterize him that he becomes this or that. In the philosopher 
conversely, there is nothing whatever that is impersonal; and above all his morality bears decided 
and decisive witness to who he is - that is, in what order of rank the innermost drives of his 
nature stand in relation to each other. 
 
7 
 
How malicious philosophers can be! I know of nothing more venomous than the joke Epicurus 
permitted himself against Plato and the Platonists; he called them Dionysiokolakes. That means 
literally - and this is the foreground meaning -"flatterers of Dionysius," in other words, tyrant's 
baggage and lickspittles; but addition to this he also wants to say, "they are all actors, there is 
nothing genuine about them" (for Dionysiokolax was a popular name for an actor). And the latter 
is really the malice that Epicurus aimed at Plato: he was peeved by the grandiose manner, the 
mise en scene at which Plato and his disciples were so expert - at which Epicurus was not an 
expert - he, that old schoolmaster from Samos who sat, hidden away, in his little garden at 
Athens and wrote three hundred books - who knows? perhaps from rage and ambition against 
Plato? 
It took a hundred years until Greece found out who this garden god, Epicurus, had been - did 
they find out? 
 
8 
 
There is a point in every philosophy when the philosopher's "conviction" appears on the stage - 
or to use the language of an ancient Mystery: 
 
Adventavit asinus, 
Pulcher et fortissimus. 
9 
 
"According to nature" you want to live? O you noble Stoics, what deceptive words these are! 
Imagine a being like nature, wasteful beyond measure, indifferent beyond measure, without 
purposes and consideration, without mercy and justice, fertile and desolate and uncertain at the 
same time; imagine indifference itself as a power - how could you live according to this 
indifference? Is that not precisely wanting to be other than this nature? Is not living - estimating, 
preferring, being unjust, being limited - wanting to be different? And supposing your imperative 
"live according to nature" meant at bottom as much as "live according to life" how could you not 
do that? Why make a principle of what you yourselves are and must be? 
In truth, the matter is altogether different: while you pretend rapturously to read the canon of 
your law in nature, you want something opposite, you strange actors and self-deceivers! Your 
pride wants to impose your morality, your ideal, on nature - even on nature - and incorporate 
them in her; you demand that she be nature "according to the Stoa," and you would like all 
existence to exist only after your own image - as an immense eternal glorification and 
generalization of Stoicism. For all your love of truth, you have forced yourselves so long, so 
persistently, so rigidly-hypnotically to see nature the wrong way, namely Stoically, that you are 
no longer able to see her differently. And some abysmal arrogance finally still inspires you with 
the insane hope that because you know how to tyrannize yourselves - Stoicism is self tyranny - 
nature, too, lets herself be tyrannized: is not the Stoic - a piece of nature? 
But this is an ancient, eternal story: what formerly happened with the Stoics still happens today, 
too, as soon as any philosophy begins to believe in itself. It always creates the world in its own 
image; it cannot do otherwise. Philosophy is this tyrannical drive itself, the most spiritual will to 
power, to the "creation of the world," to the causa prima. 
 
10 
 
The eagerness and subtlety-I might even say, shrewdness- with which the problem of "the real 
and the apparent world" is to day attacked all over Europe makes one think and wonder; and 
anyone who hears nothing in the background except a "will to truth," certainly does not have the 
best of ears. In rare and isolate instances it may really be the case that such a will to truth, some 
extravagant and adventurous courage, a metaphysician's ambition to hold a hopeless position, 
may participate and ultimately prefer even a handful of "certainty" to a whole carload of 
beautiful possibilities; there may actually be puritanical fanatics of conscience who prefer even a 
certain nothing to an uncertain something to lie down on - and die. But this is nihilism and the 
sign of a despairing, mortally weary soul - however courageous the gestures of such a virtue may 
look. 
It seems, however, to be otherwise with stronger and livelier thinkers who are still eager for life. 
When they side against appearance, and speak of "perspective," with a new arrogance; when they 
rank the credibility of their own bodies about as low as the credibility of the visual evidence that 
"the earth stands still," and thus, apparently in good humor, let their securest possession go (for 
in what does one at present believe more firmly than in one's body?) -who knows if they are not 
trying at bottom to win back something that was formerly an even securer possession, something 
of the ancient domain of the faith of former times, perhaps the "immortal soul," perhaps "the old 
God," in short, ideas by which one could live better, that is to say, more vigorously and 
cheerfully than by "modern ideas"? There is mistrust of these modern ideas in this attitude, a 
disbelief in all that has been constructed yesterday and today; there is perhaps some slight 
admixture of satiety and scorn, unable to endure any longer the bric-a-brac of concepts of the 
most diverse origin, which is the form in which so-called positivism offers itself on the market 
today; a disgust of the more fastidious taste at the village-fair motleyness and patchiness of all 
these reality-philosophasters in whom there is nothing new or genuine, except this motleyness. In 
this, it seems to me, we should agree with these skeptical anti-realists and knowledge 
microscopists of today: their instinct, which repels them from modern reality, is unrefuted - what 
do their retrograde bypaths concern us! The main thing about them is not that they wish to go 
back, but that they wish to get - away. A little more strength, flight, courage, and artistic power. 
and they would want to rise - not return! 
 
11 
 
It seems to me that today attempts are made everywhere to diver attention from the actual 
influence Kant exerted on German philosophy, and especially to ignore prudently the value he 
set upon himself. Kant was first and foremost proud of his table of categories; with that in his 
hand he said: "This is the most difficult thing that could ever be undertaken on behalf of 
metaphysics." 
Let us only understand this "could be"! He was proud of having discovered a new faculty in man, 
the faculty for synthetic judgments a priori. Suppose he deceived himself in this matter; the 
development and rapid flourishing of German philosophy depended nevertheless on his pride, 
and on the eager rivalry of the younger generation to discover, if possible, something still 
prouder - at all events "new faculties"! 
But let us reflect; it is high time to do so. "How are synthetic judgments a priori possible?" Kant 
asked himself - and what really is his answer? "By virtue of a faculty" but unfortunately not in 
five words, but so circumstantially, venerably, and with such a display of German profundity and 
curlicues that people simply failed to note the comical niaiserie allemande involved in such an 
answer. People were actually beside themselves with delight over this new faculty, and the 
jubilation reached its climax when Kant further discovered a moral faculty in man - for at that 
time the Germans were still moral and not yet addicted to Realpolitik. 
The honeymoon of German philosophy arrived. All the young theologians of the Tübingen 
seminary went into the bushes - all looking for "faculties." And what did they not find - in that 
innocent, rich, and still youthful period of the German spirit, to which romanticism, the 
malignant fairy, piped and sang, when one could not yet distinguish between "finding" and 
"inventing"! Above all, a faculty for the "surpra-sensible": Schelling christened it intellectual 
intuition, and thus gratified the most heartfelt cravings of the Germans, whose cravings were at 
bottom pious. One can do no greater wrong to the whole of this exuberant and enthusiastic 
movement, which was really youthfulness, however boldly it disguised itself in hoary and senile 
concepts, than to take it seriously or worse, to treat it with moral indignation. Enough, one grew 
older and the dream vanished. A time came when people scratched their heads, and they still 
scratch them today. One had been dreaming, and first and foremost - old Kant. "By virtue of a 
faculty" - he had said, or at least meant. But is that an answer? An explanation? Or is it not rather 
merely a repetition of the question? How does opium induce sleep? "By virtue of a faculty," 
namely the virtus dormitiva, replies the doctor in Moliere, 
 
Quia est in eo virtus dormitiva, 
Cujus est natura sensus assoupire. 
But such replies belong in comedy, and it is high time to replace the Kantian question, "How are 
synthetic judgments a priori possible?" by another question, "Why is belief in such judgments 
necessary?" - and to comprehend that such judgments must be believed to be true, for the sake of 
the preservation of creatures like ourselves; though they might, of course, be false judgments for 
all that! Or to speak more clearly and coarsely: synthetic judgments a priori should not "be 
possible" at all; we have no right to them; in our mouths they are nothing but false judgments. 
Only, of course, the belief in their truth is necessary, as a foreground belief and visual evidence 
belonging to the perspective optics of life. 
Finally, to call to mind the enormous influence that "German philosophy" - I hope you 
understand its right to quotation marks - has exercised throughout the whole of Europe, there is 
no doubt that a certain virtus dormitiva had a share in it: it was a delight to the noble idlers, the 
virtuous, the mystics, artists, three-quarter Christians, and political obscurantists of all nations, to 
find, thanks to German philosophy, an antidote to the still predominant sensualism which 
overflowed from the last century into this, in short - "sensus assoupire." 
 
12 
 
As for materialistic atomism, it is one of the best refuted theories there are, and in Europe 
perhaps no one in the learned world is now so unscholarly as to attach serious significance to it 
for convenient household use (as an abbreviation of the means of expression) thanks chiefly to 
the Dalmatian Boscovich and the Pole Copernicus have been the greatest and most successful 
opponents of visual evidence so far. For while Copernicus has persuaded us to believe, contrary 
to all the senses, that the earth does not stand fast, Boscovich has taught us to abjure the belief in 
the last part of the earth that "stood fast" - the belief in substance," in "matter," in the earth-
residuum and particle-atom; it is the greatest triumph over the senses that has been gained on 
earth so far. 
One must, however, go still further. and also declare war, relentless war unto death, against the 
"atomistic need" which still leads a dangerous afterlife in places where no one suspects it, just 
like the more celebrated "metaphysical need": one must also, first of all, give the finishing stroke 
to that other and more calamitous atomism which Christianity has taught best and longest, the 
soul atomism. Let it be permitted to designate by this expression the belief which regards the 
soul as something indestructible. eternal, in divisible, as a monad, as an atomon: this belief ought 
to be expelled from science! Between ourselves, it is not at all necessary to get rid of "the soul" 
at the same time, and thus to renounce one of the most ancient and venerable hypotheses - as 
happens frequently to clumsy naturalists who can hardly touch on "the soul" without 
immediately losing it. But the way is open for new versions and refinements of the soul-
hypothesis; and such conceptions as "mortal soul," and "soul as subjective multiplicity," and 
''soul as social structure of the drives and affects want henceforth to have citizens' rights in 
science. When the new psychologist puts an end to the superstitions which have so far flourished 
with almost tropical luxuriance around the idea of the soul, he practically exiles himself into a 
new desert and a new suspicion - it is possible that the older psychologists had a merrier and 
more comfortable time of it; eventually, however, he finds that precisely thereby he also 
concerns himself to invention - and - who knows? - perhaps to discovery. 
 
13 
 
Physiologists should think before putting down the instinct of self-preservation as the cardinal 
instinct of an organic being. A living thing seeks above all to discharge its strength - life itself is 
will to power; self-preservation is only one of the indirect and most frequent results. 
In short, here as everywhere else, let us beware of superfluous teleological principles - one of 
which is the instinct of self preservation (we owe it to Spinoza's inconsistency). Thus method, 
which must be essentially economy of principles, demands it. 
 
14 
 
It is perhaps just dawning on five or six minds that physics, too, is only an interpretation and 
exegesis of the world (to suit us, if I may say so!) and not a world-explanation; but insofar as it is 
based on belief in the senses, it is regarded as more, and for a long time to come must be 
regarded as more - namely, as an explanation. Eyes and fingers speak in its favor, visual 
evidence and palpableness do, too: this strikes an age with fundamentally plebian tastes as 
fascinating, persuasive, and convincing - after all, it follows instinctively the canon of truth of 
eternally popular sensualism. What is clear, what is "explained"? Only what can be seen and felt 
- every problem has to be pursued to that point. Conversely, the charm of the Platonic way of 
thinking, which was a noble way of thinking, consisted precisely in resistance to obvious sense-
evidence - perhaps among men who enjoyed even stronger and more demanding senses than our 
contemporaries, but who knew how to find a higher triumph in remaining masters of their senses 
- and this by means of pale, cold, gray concept nets which they threw over the motley whirl of 
the senses - the mob of the senses, as Plato said. In this overcoming of the world and interpreting 
of the world in the manner of Plato, there was an enjoyment different from that which the 
physicists of today offer us - and also the Darwinists and anti-teleologists among the workers in 
physiology, with their principle of the "smallest possible force" and the greatest possible 
stupidity. "Where man cannot find anything to see or to grasp, he has no further business" - that 
is certainly an imperative different from the Platonic one, but it may be the right imperative for a 
tough, industrious race of machinists and bridge-builders of the future, who have nothing but 
rough work to do. 
 
15 
 
To study physiology with a clear conscience, one must insist that the sense organs are not 
phenomena in the sense of idealistic philosophy; as such they could not be causes! Sensualism, 
therefore, at least as a regulative hypothesis, if not as a heuristic principle. 
What? And others even say that the external world is the work of our organs? But then our body, 
as a part of this external world, would be the work of our organs! But then our organs themselves 
would be the work of our organs! It seems to me that this is a complete reductio ad absurdum - 
assuming that the concept of a causa sui is something fundamentally absurd. Consequently, the 
external world is just the work of our organs - ? 
 
16 
 
There are still harmless self-observers who believe that there are "immediate certainties"; for 
example, "I think," or as the superstition of Schopenhauer put it, "I will"; as though knowledge 
here got hold of its object purely and nakedly as "the thing in it self" without any falsification on 
the part of either the subject or the object. But that "immediate certainty," as well as "absolute 
knowledge" and the "thing in itself," involve a contradictio adjecto. I shall repeat a hundred 
times; we really ought to free our selves from the seduction of words! 
Let the people suppose that knowledge means knowing things entirely; the philosopher must say 
to himself: When I analyze the process that is expressed in the sentence, "I think," I find a whole 
series of daring assertions that would be difficult, perhaps impossible, to prove; for example, that 
it is I who think, that there must necessarily be something that thinks, that thinking is an activity 
and operation on the part of a being who is thought of as a cause, that there is an "ego," and, 
finally, that it is already determined what is to be designated by thinking - that I know what 
thinking is. For if I had not already decided within myself what it is, by what standard could I 
determine whether that which is just happening is not perhaps "willing" or "feeling"? In short, 
the assertion "I think" assumes that I compare my state at the present moment with other states of 
myself which I know, in order to determine what it is; on account of this retrospective 
connection with further "knowledge," it has, at any rate, no immediate certainty for me. 
In place of the "immediate certainty" in which the people may believe in the case at hand, the 
philosopher thus finds a series of metaphysical questions presented to him, truly searching 
questions of the intellect; to wit: "From where do I get the concept of thing? Why do I believe in 
cause and effect? What gives me the right to speak of an ego, and even of an ego as cause, and 
finally ego as the cause of thought?" Whoever ventures to answer the metaphysical questions at 
once by an appeal to a sort of intuitive perception, like the person who says, "I think, and know 
that at least, is true, actual, and certain" - will encounter a smile and two question marks from a 
philosopher nowadays. "Sir," the philosopher will perhaps give him to understand, "it is 
improbable that you are not mistaken; but why insist on the truth?" 
 
17 
 
With regard to the superstitions of logicians, I shall never tire of emphasizing a small terse fact, 
which these superstitious minds hate to concede - namely, that a thought comes when "it" 
wishes. and not when "I" wish, so that it is a falsification of the facts of the case to say that the 
subject "I" is the condition of the predicate "think." It thinks; but that this "it" is precisely the 
famous old "ego" is, to put it mildly, only a supposition, an assertion. and assuredly not an 
"immediate certainty." After all, one has even gone too far with this "it thinks" - even the "it" 
contains an interpretation of the process, and does not belong to the process itself. 0ne infers here 
according to the grammatical habit: "Thinking is an activity; every activity requires an agent; 
consequently..." 
It was pretty much according to the same schema that the older atomism sought, besides the 
operating "power," that lump of matter in which it resides and out of which it operates - the 
atom. More rigorous minds, however, learned at last to get along without this "earth-residuum," 
and perhaps some day we shall accustom ourselves, including the logicians, to get along without 
the little "it" (which is all that is left of the honest little old ego). 
 
18 
 
It is certainly not the least charm of a theory that it is refutable; it is precisely thereby that it 
attracts subtler minds. It seems that the hundred-times-refuted theory of a "free will" owes its 
persistence to this charm alone; again and again someone comes along who feels he is strong 
enough to refute it. 
 
19 
 
Philosophers are accustomed to speak of the will as if it were the best-known thing in the world; 
indeed, Schopenhauer has given us to understand that the will alone is really known to us, 
absolutely and completely known, without subtraction or addition. But again and again it seems 
to me that in this case, too, Schopenhauer only did what philosophers are in the habit of doing - 
he adopted a popular prejudice and exaggerated it. Willing seems to me to be above all 
something complicated, something that is a unit only as a word - and it is precisely in this one 
word that the popular prejudice lurks, which has defeated the always inadequate caution of 
philosophers. So let us for once be more cautious, let us be "unphilosophical": let us say that in 
all willing there is, first, a plurality of sensations, namely, the sensation of the state "away from 
which" the sensation of the state "towards which," the sensation of this "from and towards" 
themselves, and then also an accompanying muscular sensation, which, even without our putting 
into motion "arms and legs," begins its action by force of habit as soon as we "will" anything. 
Therefore just as sensations (and indeed many kinds of sensation) are to be recognized as 
ingredients of the will, so, secondly, should thinking also: in every act of the will there is a ruling 
thought - let us not imagine it possible to sever this thought from the "willing," as if any will 
would then remain over! 
Third, the will is not only a complex of sensation and thinking, but it is above all an affect, and 
specifically the affect of the command. That which is termed "freedom of the will" is essentially 
the affect of superiority in relation to him who must obey: "I am free, 'he' must obey" - this 
consciousness is inherent in every will; and equally so the straining of the attention, the straight 
look that fixes itself exclusively on one aim, the unconditional evaluation that "this and nothing 
else is necessary now," the inward certainty that obedience will be rendered - and whatever else 
belongs to the position of the commander. A man who wills commands something within 
himself that renders obedience, or that he believes renders obedience. 
But now let us notice what is strangest about the will - this manifold thing for which the people 
have only one word: inasmuch as in the given circumstances we are at the same time the 
commanding and the obeying parties, and as the obeying party we know the sensations of 
constraint, impulsion, pressure, resistance and motion, which usually begin immediately after the 
act of will, inasmuch as, on the other hand, we are accustomed to disregard this duality, and to 
deceive ourselves about it by means of the synthetic concept "I," a whole series of erroneous 
conclusions, and consequently of false evaluations of the will itself, has become attached to the 
act of willing - to such a degree that he who wills believes sincerely that willing suffices for 
action. Since in the great majority of cases there has been exercise of will only when the effect of 
the command - that is, obedience; that is, the action - was to be expected, the appearance has 
translated itself into the feeling, as if there were a necessity of effect. In short, he who wills 
believes with a fair amount of certainty that will and action are somehow one; he ascribes the 
success, the carrying out of the willing, to the will itself, and thereby enjoys an increase of the 
sensation of power which accompanies all success. 
"Freedom of the will" - that is the expression for the complex state of delight of the person 
exercising volition, who commands and at the same time identifies himself with the executor of 
the order - who, as such, enjoys also the triumph over obstacles, but thinks within himself that it 
was really his will itself that overcame them. In this way the person exercising volition adds the 
feeling of delight of his successful executive instruments, the useful "under-wills" or under-souls 
- indeed, our body is but a social structure composed of many souls - to his feelings of delight as 
commander L'effet c'est moi: what happens here is what happens in every well-constructed and 
happy commonwealth; namely, the governing class identifies itself with the successes of the 
commonwealth. In all willing it is absolutely a question of commanding and obeying, on the 
basis, as already said, of a social structure composed of many "souls." Hence a philosopher 
should claim the right to include willimg as such within the sphere of morals - morals being 
understood as the doctrine of the relations of supremacy under which the phenomenon of "life" 
comes to be. 
 
20 
 
That individual philosophical concepts are not anything capricious or autonomously evolving, 
but grow up in connection and relationship with each other; that, however suddenly and 
arbitrarily they seem to appear in the history of thought, they nevertheless belong just as much to 
a system as all the members of the fauna of a continent - is betrayed in the end also by the fact 
that the most diverse philosophers keep filling in a definite fundamental scheme of possible 
philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they always revolve once more in the same orbit; however 
independent of each other they may feel themselves with their critical or systematic wills, 
something within them leads them, something impels them in a definite order, one after the other 
- to wit, the innate systematic structure and relationship of their concepts. Their thinking is, in 
fact, far less a discovery than a recognition, a remembering, a return and a homecoming to a 
remote, primordial, an inclusive household of the soul, out of which those concepts grew 
originally: philosophizing is to this extent a kind of atavism of the highest order. 
The strange family resemblance of all lndian, Greek, and German philosophizing is explained 
easily enough. Where there is affinity of languages, it cannot fail, owing to the common 
philosophy of grammar - I mean, owing to the unconscious domination and guidance by similar 
grammatical functions - that everything is prepared at the outset for a similar development and 
sequence of philosophical systems; just as the way seems barred against certain other 
possibilities of world-interpretation. It is highly probable that philosophers within the domain of 
the Ural-Altaic languages (where the concept of the subject is least developed) look otherwise 
"into the world," and will be found on paths of thought different from those of the Indo-
Germanic peoples and the Muslims: the spell of certain grammatical functions is ultimately also 
the spell of physiological valuations and racial conditions. 
So much by way of rejecting Locke's superficiality regarding the origin of ideas. 
 
21 
 
The causa sui is the best self-contradiction that has been conceived so far, it is a sort of rape and 
perversion of logic; but the extravagant pride of man has managed to entangle itself profoundly 
and frightfully with just this nonsense. The desire for "freedom of the will" in the superlative 
metaphysical sense, which still holds sway, unfortunately, in the minds of the half-educated; the 
desire to bear the entire and ultimate responsibility for one's actions oneself, and to absolve God, 
the world, ancestors, chance, and society involves nothing less than to be precisely this causa sui 
and, with more than Münchhausen's audacity, to pull oneself up into existence by the hair, out of 
the swamps of nothingness. Suppose someone were thus to see through the boorish simplicity of 
this celebrated concept of "free will" and put it out of his head altogether, l beg of him to carry 
his "enlightenment" a step further, and so put out of his head the contrary of this monstrous 
conception of "free will": I mean "unfree will," which amounts to a misuse of cause and effect. 
One should not wrongly reify "cause" and "effect" as the natural scientists do (and whoever, like 
them, now "naturalizes" in his thinking), according to the prevailing mechanical doltishness 
which makes the cause press and push until it "effects" its end; one should use "cause" and 
"effect" only as pure concepts, that is to say, as conventional fictions for the purpose of 
designation and communication - not for explanation. In the "in itself" there is nothing of "causal 
connections," of "necessity," or of "psychological non-freedom"; there the effect does not follow 
the cause, there is no rule of "law." It is we alone who have devised cause, sequence, for-each-
other, relativity, constraint, number, law, freedom, motive, and purpose; and when we project 
and mix this symbol world into things as if it existed "in itself," we act once more as we have 
always acted - mythologically. The "unfree will" is mythology; in real life it is only a matter of 
strong and weak wills. 
lt is almost always a symptom of what is lacking in himself when a thinker senses in every 
"causal connection" and "psychological necessity" something of constraint, need, compulsion to 
obey, pressure, and unfreedom; it is suspicious to have such feelings - that person betrays 
himself. And in general, if I have observed correctly, the "unfreedom of the will" is regarded as a 
problem from two entirely opposite standpoints, but always in a profoundly personal manner: 
some will not give up their "responsibility," their belief in themselves, the personal right to their 
merits at any price (the vain races belong to this class). Others, on the contrary, do not wish to be 
answerable for anything, or blamed for anything, and owing to an inward self-contempt, seek to 
lay the blame for them selves somewhere else. The latter, when they write books, are in the habit 
today of taking the side of criminals; a sort of socialist pity is their most attractive disguise. And 
as a matter of fact, the fatalism of the weak-willed embellishes itself surprisingly when it can 
pose as "la religion de la souffrance humaine"; that is its "good taste." 
 
22 
 
Forgive me as an old philologist who cannot desist from the malice of putting his finger on bad 
modes of interpretation: but "nature's conformity to law," of which you physicists talk so proudly 
as though - why, it exists only owing to your interpretation and bad "philology." It is no matter of 
fact, no "text," but rather only a naively humanitarian emendation and perversion of meaning, 
with which you make abundant concessions to the democratic instincts of the modern soul! 
"Everywhere equality before the law; nature is no different in that respect, no better off than we 
are" - a fine instance of ulterior motivation, in which the plebian antagonism to everything 
privileged and autocratic as well as a second and more refined atheism are disguised once more. 
"Ni Dieu, ni maître" - that is what you, too, want; and therefore "cheers for the law of nature!" - 
is it not so? But as said above, that is interpretation, not text; and somebody might come along 
who, with opposite intentions and modes of interpretation, could read out of the same "nature" 
and with regard to the same phenomena rather the tyrannically inconsiderate and relentless 
enforcement of claims of power - an interpreter who would picture the unexceptional and 
unconditional aspects of all "will to power" so vividly that almost every word, even the word 
"tyranny" itself, would eventually sound unsuitable, or a weakening and attenuating metaphor -
being too human - but he might, nevertheless, end by asserting the same about this world as you 
do, namely, that it has a "necessary'' and "calculable" course, not because laws obtain in it, but 
because they are absolutely lacking, and every power draws its ultimate consequences at every 
moment. Supposing that this also is only interpretation - and you will be eager enough to make 
this objection - well sp much the better. 
 
23 
 
All psychology so far has got stuck in moral prejudices and fears; it has not dared to descend into 
the depths. To understand it as morphology and the doctrine of the development of the will to 
power, as I do - nobody has yet come close to doing this even in thought - insofar as it is 
permissible to recognize in what has been written so far a symptom of what has so far been kept 
silent. The power of moral prejudices has penetrated deeply into the most spiritual world, which 
would seem to be the coldest and most devoid of presuppositions, and has obviously operated in 
an injurious, inhibiting, blinding, and distorting manner. A proper physio-psychology has to 
contend with unconscious resistance in the heart of the investigator, it has "the heart" against it: 
even a doctrine of the reciprocal dependence of the "good' and the "wicked' drives, causes (as 
refined immorality) distress and aversion in a still hale and hearty conscience - still more so, a 
doctrine of the derivation of good impulses from wicked ones. If, however, a person should 
regard even the affects of hatred, envy, covetousness, and the lust to rule as conditions of life, as 
factors which, fundamentally and essentially must be present in the general economy of life (and 
must, there, be further enhanced if life is to be further enhanced) - he will suffer from such a 
view of things as from seasickness. And yet even this hypothesis is far from being the strangest 
and most painful in this immense and almost new domain of dangerous insights; and there are in 
fact a hundred good reasons why everyone should keep away from it who - can. 
On the other hand, if one has once drifted there with one's bark, well! all right! let us clench our 
teeth! let us open our eyes and keep our hand firm on the helm! We sail right over morality, we 
crush, we destroy perhaps the remains of our own morality by daring to make our voyage there - 
but what matter are we! Never yet did a profounder world of insight reveal itself to daring 
travelers and adventurers, and the psychologist who thus "makes a sacrifice" - it is not the 
sacrifizio dell' intelletto, on the contrary! - will at least be entitled to demand in return that 
psychology shall be recognized again as the queen of the sciences, for whose service and 
preparation the other sciences exist. For psychology is now again the path to the fundamental 
problems. 
Beyond Good And Evil 
By: Friedrich Nietzsche 
 
Part Two : The Free Spirit 
 
24 
 
O sancta simplicitas! In what strange simplification and falsification man lives! One can never 
cease wondering once one has acquired eyes for this marvel! How we have made everything 
around us clear and free and easy and simple! how we have been able to give our senses a 
passport to everything superficial, our thoughts a divine desire for wanton leaps and wrong 
inferences! how from the beginning we have contrived to retain our ignorance in order to enjoy 
an almost inconceivable freedom, lack of scruple and caution, heartiness, and gaiety of life - in 
order to enjoy life! And only on this now solid, granite foundation of ignorance could knowledge 
rise so far - the will to knowledge on the foundation of a far more powerful will: the will to 
ignorance, to the uncertain, to the untrue! Not as its opposite, but as its refinement! Even if 
language, here as elsewhere, will not get over its awkwardness, and will continue to talk of 
opposites where there are only degrees and many subtleties of gradation; even if the inveterate 
Tartuffery of morals, which now belongs to our unconquerable "flesh and blood," infects the 
words even of those of us who know better - here and there we understand it and laugh at the 
way in which precisely science at its best seeks most to keep us in this simplified, thoroughly 
artificial, suitably constructed and suitably falsified world - at the way in which, willy-nilly, it 
loves error, because, being alive, it loves life. 
 
25 
 
After such a cheerful commencement, a serious word would like to be heard; it appeals to the 
most serious. Take care, philosophers and friends, of knowledge, and beware of martyrdom! Of 
suffering "for the truth's sake"! Even of defending yourselves! spoils all the innocence and fine 
neutrality of your conscience; makes you headstrong against objections and red rags; it stupefies, 
animalizes, and brutalizes when in the struggle with danger, slander, suspicion, expulsion, and 
even worse consequences of hostility, you have to pose as protectors of truth upon earth - as 
though "the truth" were such an innocuous and incompetent creature as to require protectors! and 
you of all people, you knights of the most sorrowful countenances dear loafers and cobweb-
spinners of the spirit! After all, you know well enough that it cannot be of any con. sequence if 
you of all people are proved right; you know that no philosopher so far has been proved right, 
and that there might be a more laudable truthfulness in every little question mark that you place 
after your special words and favorite doctrines (and occasionally after yourselves) than in all the 
solemn gestures and trumps before accusers and law courts. Rather, go away. Flee into 
concealment. And have your masks and subtlety, that you ma mistaken for what you are not, or 
feared a little. And don't the garden, the garden with golden trelliswork. And have around you 
who are as a garden - or as music on the waters evening, when the day is turning into memories. 
Choose the solitude, the free, playful, light solitude that gives you, too, the right, to remain good 
in some sense. How poisonous, how crafty, hot bad, does every long war make one, that cannot 
be waged open] by means of force! How personal does a long fear make one, long watching of 
enemies, of possible enemies! These outcasts society, these long-pursued, wickedly persecuted 
ones - also compulsory recluses, the Spinozas or Giordano Brunos always come in the end, even 
under the most spiritual masquerade, perhaps without being themselves aware of it, sophisticated 
vengeance-seekers and poison-brewers (let someone lay bare the foundation of Spinoza's ethics 
and theology!), not to speak of the stupidity of moral indignation, which is the unfailing sign in a 
philosopher that his philosophical sense of humor has left him. The martyrdom of the 
philosopher, his "sacrifice for the sake of truth," forces into the light whatever of the agitator and 
actor lurks in him; and if one has so far contemplated him only with artistic curiosity, with regard 
to many a philosopher it is easy to understand the dangerous desire to see him also in his 
degeneration (degenerated into a "martyr," into a stage- and platform-bawler). Only, that it is 
necessary with such a desire to be clear what spectacle one will see in any case - merely a satyr 
play, merely an epilogue farce, merely the continued proof that the long, real tragedy is at an 
end, assuming that every philosophy was in its genesis a long tragedy. 
 
26 
 
Every choice human being strives instinctively for a citadel and a secrecy where he is saved from 
the crowd, the many, the great majority - where he may forget "men who are the rule," being 
their exception - excepting only the one case in which he is pushed straight to such men by a still 
stronger instinct, as a seeker after knowledge in the great and exceptional sense. Anyone who, in 
intercourse with men, does not occasionally glisten in all the colors of distress, green and gray 
with disgust, satiety, sympathy, gloominess, and loneliness, is certainly not a man of elevated 
tastes; supposing, however, that he does not take all this burden and disgust upon himself 
voluntarily, that he persistently avoids it, and remains, as I said, quietly and proudly hidden in his 
citadel, one thing is certain: he was not made, he was not predestined, for knowledge. If he were, 
he would one day have to say to himself: "The devil take my good taste! but the rule is more 
interesting than the exception - than myself, the exception!" And be would go down and above 
all, he would go "inside." The long and serious study of the average man, and consequently 
much disguise, self-overcoming, familiarity, and bad contact (all contact is bad contact except 
with one's equals) - this constitutes a necessary part of the life-history of every philosopher, 
perhaps the most disagreeable, odious, and disappointing part. If he is fortunate, however, as a 
favorite child of knowledge should be, he will encounter suitable shortcuts and helps for his task; 
I mean so-called cynics, those who simply recognize the animal, the commonplace, and "the 
rule" in themselves, and at the same time still have that degree of spirituality and that itch which 
makes them talk of themselves and their likes before witnesses - sometimes they even wallow in 
books, as on their own dung. Cynicism is the only form in which base souls approach honesty; 
and the higher man must listen closely to every coarse or subtle cynicism, and congratulate 
himself when a clown without shame or a scientific satyr speaks out precisely in front of him. 
There are even cases where enchantment mixes with the disgust - namely, where by a freak of 
nature genius is tied to some such indiscreet billygoat and ape, as in the case of the Abbé Galiani, 
the profoundest, most clear-sighted, and perhaps also filthiest man of his century - he was far 
profounder than Voltaire and consequently also a good deal more taciturn. It happens more 
frequently, as has been hinted, that a scientific head is placed on an ape's body, a subtle 
exceptional understanding in a base soul, an occurrence by no means rare, especially among 
doctors and physiologists of morality. And whenever anyone speaks without bitterness, quite 
innocently, of man as a belly with two requirements, and a head with one; whenever anyone 
sees, seeks, and wants to see only hunger, sexual lust, and vanity as the real and only motives of 
human actions; in short, when anyone speaks "badly" and not even "wickedly" of man, the lover 
of knowledge should listen subtly land diligently; he should altogether have an open ear 
wherever people talk without indignation. For the indignant and Whoever perpetually tears and 
lacerates with his own teeth himself (or as a substitute, the world, or God, or society) may 
indeed, morally speaking, stand higher than the laughing and self-satisfied satyr, but in every 
other sense they are a more ordinary, more indifferent, and less instructive case. And no one lies 
as much as the indignant do. 
 
27 
 
It is hard to be understood, especially when one thinks and lives gangasrotogati among men who 
think and live differently namely, kurmagati, or at best "the way frogs walk," mandeikagati (I 
obviously do everything to be "hard to understand" myself!) - and one should be cordially 
grateful for the good will to some subtlety of interpretation. As regards "the good friends," 
however, who are always too lazy and think that as friends they have a right to relax, one does 
well to grant them from the outset some leeway and romping place for misunderstanding: then 
on can even laugh - or get rid of them altogether, these good friends - and also laugh. 
 
28 
 
What is most difficult to render from one language into an other is the tempo of its style, which 
has its basis in the character of the race, or to speak more physiologically, in the average temp of 
its metabolism. There are honestly meant translations that, a involuntary vulgarizations, are 
almost falsifications of the original merely because its bold and merry tempo (which leaps over 
an obviates all dangers in things and words) could not be translates A German is almost 
incapable of presto in his language; thus also as may be reasonably inferred, of many of the most 
delightful and daring nuances of free, free-spirited thought. And just as the buffoon and satyr are 
foreign to him in body and conscience, so Aristophanes and Petronius are untranslatable for him. 
Everything ponderous, viscous, and solemnly clumsy, all long-winded and boring types of style 
are developed in profuse variety among German - forgive me the fact that even Goethe's prose, 
in its mixture o stiffness and elegance, is no exception, being a reflection of the "good old time" 
to which it belongs, and a reflection of German taste at a time when there still was a "German 
taste" - a rococo taste in moribus et artibus. Lessing is an exception, owing to his histrionic 
nature which understood much and understood how to do many things. He was not the translator 
of Bayle for nothing and liked to flee to the neighborhood of Diderot and Voltaire, and better yet 
- that of the Roman comedy writers. In tempo, too, Lessing loved free thinking and escape from 
Germany. But how could the German language, even in the prose of a Lessing, imitate the tempo 
of Machiavelli, who in his Principe [The Prince] lets us breathe the dry, refined air of Florence 
and cannot help presenting the most serious matters in a boisterous allegrissimo, perhaps not 
without a malicious artistic sense of the contrast he risks - long, difficult, hard, dangerous 
thoughts and the tempo of the gallop and the very best, most capricious humor? Who, finally, 
could venture on a German translation of Petronius, who, more than any great musician so far, 
was a master of presto in invention, ideas, and words? What do the swamps of the sick, wicked 
world, even the "ancient world," matter in the end, when one has the feet of a wind as he did, the 
rush, the breath, the liberating scorn of a wind that makes everything healthy by making 
everything run! And as for Aristophanes - that transfiguring, complementary spirit for whose 
sake one forgives everything Hellenic for having existed, provided one has understood in its full 
profundity all that needs to be forgiven and transfigured here - there is nothing that has caused 
me to meditate more on Plato's secrecy and sphinx nature than the happily preserved petit fait 
that under the pillow of his deathbed there was found no "Bible," nor anything Egyptian, 
Pythagorean, or Platonic - but a volume of Aristophanes. How could even Plato have endured 
life - a Greek life he repudiated - without an Aristophanes? 
 
29 
 
Independence is for the very few; it is a privilege of the strong. And whoever attempts it even 
with the best right but without inner constraint proves that he is probably not only strong, but 
also daring to the point of recklessness. He enters into a labyrinth, he multiplies a thousandfold 
the dangers which life brings with it in any case, not the least of which is that no one can see how 
and where he loses his way, becomes lonely, and is torn piecemeal by some minotaur of 
conscience. Supposing one like that comes to grief, this happens so far from the comprehension 
of men that they neither feel it nor sympathize. And he cannot go back any longer. Nor can he go 
back to the pity of men. 
 
30 
 
Our highest insights must - and should - sound like follies and sometimes like crimes when they 
are heard without permission by those who are not predisposed and predestined for them. The 
difference between the exoteric and the esoteric, formerly known to philosophers - among the 
Indians as among the Greeks, Persians, and Muslims, in short, wherever one believed in an order 
of rank and not in equality and equal rights - does not so much consist in this, that the exoteric 
approach comes from outside and sees, estimates, measures, and judges from the outside, not the 
inside: what is much more essential is that the exoteric approach sees things from below, the 
esoteric looks down from above. There are heights of the soul from which even tragedy ceases to 
look tragic; and rolling together all the woe of the world - who could dare to decide whether its 
sight would necessarily seduce us and compel us to feel pity and thus double this woe? What 
serves the higher type of men as nourishment or delectation must almost be poison for a very 
different and inferior type. The virtues of the common man might perhaps signify vices and 
weaknesses in a philosopher. It could be possible that a man of a high type, when degenerating 
and perishing, might only at that point acquire qualities that would require those in the lower 
sphere into which he had sunk to begin to venerate him like a saint. There are books that have 
opposite values for soul and health, depending on whether the lower soul, the lower vitality, or 
the higher and more vigorous ones turn to them: in the former case, these books are dangerous 
and lead to crumbling and disintegration; in the latter, heralds' cries that call the bravest to their 
courage. Books for all the world are always foul-smelling books: the smell of small people clings 
to them. Where the people eat and drink, even where they venerate, it usually stinks. One should 
not go to church if one wants to breathe pure air. 
 
31 
 
When one is young, one venerates and - despises without that art of nuances which constitutes 
the best gain of life, and it is only fair that one has to pay dearly for having assaulted men and 
things in this manner with Yes and No. Everything is arranged so that the worst of tastes, the 
taste for the unconditional, should be cruelly fooled and abused until a man learns to put a little 
art into his feelings and rather to risk trying even what is artificial - as the real artists of life do. 
The wrathful and reverent attitudes characteristic of youth do not seem to permit themselves any 
rest until they have forged men and things in such a way that these attitudes may be vented on 
them - after all, youth in itself has something of forgery and deception. Later, when the young 
soul, tortured by all kinds of disappointments', finally turns suspiciously against itself, still hot 
and wild, even in its suspicion and pangs of conscience - how wroth it is with itself now! how it 
tears itself to pieces, impatiently! how it takes revenge for its long self-delusion, just as if it had 
been a deliberate blindness! In this transition one punishes oneself with mistrust against one's 
own feelings; one tortures one's own enthusiasm with doubts; indeed, one experiences even a 
good conscience as a danger, as if it were a way of wrapping oneself in veils and the exhaustion 
of subtler honesty - and above all one takes sides, takes sides on principle, against "youth." Ten 
years later one comprehends that all this, too - was still youth. 
 
32 
 
During the longest part of human history - so-called prehistorical times - the value or disvalue of 
an action was derived from its consequences. The action itself was considered as little as its 
origin. It was rather the way a distinction or disgrace still reaches back today from a child to its 
parents, in China: it was the retroactive force of success or failure that led men to think well or ill 
of an action. Let us call this period the pre-moral period of mankind: the imperative "know 
thyself!" was as yet unknown. In the last ten thousand years, however, one has reached the point, 
step by step, in a few large regions on the earth, where it is no longer the consequences but the 
origin of an action that one allows to decide its value. On the whole this is a great event which 
involves a considerable refinement of vision and standards; it is the unconscious aftereffect of 
the rule of aristocratic values and the faith in "descent" - the sign of a period that one may call 
moral in the narrower sense. It involves the first attempt at self-knowledge. Instead of the 
consequences, the origin: indeed a reversal of perspective! Surely, a reversal achieved only after 
long struggles and vacillations. To be sure, a calamitous new superstition, an odd narrowness of 
interpretation, thus become dominant: the origin of an action was interpreted in the most definite 
sense as origin in an intention; one came to agree that the value of an action lay in the value of 
the intention. The intention as the whole origin and prehistory of an action - almost to the present 
day this prejudice dominated moral praise, blame, judgment, and philosophy on earth. But today 
- shouldn't we have reached the necessity of once more resolving on a reversal and fundamental 
shift in values, owing to another self-examination of man, another growth in profundity? Don't 
we stand at the threshold of a period which should be designated negatively, to begin with, as 
extra-moral? After all, today at least we immoralists have the suspicion that the decisive value of 
an action lies precisely in what is unintentional in it, while everything about it that is intentional, 
everything about it that can be seen, known, "conscious," still belongs to its surface and skin - 
which, like every skin, betrays something but conceals even more. In short, we believe that the 
intention is merely a sign and symptom that still requires interpretation - moreover, a sign that 
means too much and therefore, taken by itself alone, almost nothing. We believe that morality in 
the traditional sense, the morality of intentions, was a prejudice, precipitate and perhaps 
provisional - something on the order of astrology and alchemy - but in any case something that 
must be overcome. The overcoming of morality, in a certain sense even the self-overcoming of 
morality - let this be the name for that long secret work which has been saved up for the finest 
and most honest, also the most malicious, consciences of today, as living touchstones of the soul. 
 
33 
 
There is no other way: the feelings of devotion, self-sacrifice for one's neighbor, the whole 
morality of self-denial must be questioned mercilessly and taken to court - no less than the 
aesthetics of "contemplation devoid of all interest" which is used today as a seductive guise for 
the emasculation of art, to give it a good conscience. There is too much charm and sugar in these 
feelings of "for others," "not for myself," for us not to need to become doubly suspicious at this 
point and to ask: "are these not perhaps - seductions?" That they please those who have them and 
those who enjoy their fruits, and also the mere spectator - this does not yet constitute an 
argument in their favor but rather invites caution. So let us be cautious. 
 
34 
 
Whatever philosophical standpoint one may adopt today, from every point of view the 
erroneousness of the world in which we think we live is the surest and firmest fact that we can 
lay eyes on: we find reasons upon reasons for it which would like to lure us to hypotheses 
concerning a deceptive principle in "the essence of things." But whoever holds our thinking 
itself, "the spirit," in other words, responsible for the falseness of the world - an honorable way 
out which is chosen by every conscious or unconscious advocatus dei - whoever takes this world, 
along with space, time, form, movement, to be falsely inferred - anyone like that would at least 
have ample reason to learn to be suspicious at long last of all thinking. Wouldn't thinking have 
put over on us the biggest hoax yet? And what warrant would there be that it would not continue 
to do what it has always done? In all seriousness: the innocence of our thinkers is somehow 
touching and evokes reverence, when today they still step before consciousness with the request 
that it should please give them honest answers; for example, whether it is "real," and why it so 
resolutely keeps the external world at a distance, and other questions of that kind. The faith in 
"immediate certainties" is a moral naivet6 that reflects honor on us philosophers; but - after all 
we should not be "merely moral" men. Apart from morality, this faith is a stupidity that reflects 
little honor on us. In bourgeois life ever-present suspicion may be considered a sign of "bad 
character" and hence belong among things imprudent; here, among us, beyond the bourgeois 
world and its Yes and No - what should prevent us from being imprudent and saying: a 
philosopher has nothing less than a right to "bad character," as the being who has so far always 
been fooled best on earth; he has a duty to suspicion today, to squint maliciously out of every 
abyss of suspicion. Forgive me the joke of this gloomy grimace and trope; for I myself have 
learned long ago to think differently, to estimate differently with regard to deceiving and being 
deceived, and I keep in reserve at least a couple of jostles for the blind rage with which the 
philosophers resist being deceived. Why not? It is no more than a moral prejudice that truth is 
worth more than mere appearance; it is even the worst proved assumption there is in the world. 
Let at least this much be admitted: there would be no life at all if not on the basis of perspective 
estimates and appearances; and if, with the virtuous enthusiasm and clumsiness of some 
philosophers, one wanted to abolish the "apparent world" altogether - well, supposing you could 
do that, at least nothing would be left of your "truth" either. Indeed, what forces us at all to 
suppose that there is an essential opposition of "true" and "false"? Is it not sufficient to assume 
degrees of apparentness and, as it were, lighter and darker shadows and shades of appearance - 
different "values," to use the language of painters? Why couldn't the world that concerns us be a 
fiction? And if somebody asked, "but to a fiction there surely belongs an author?" - couldn't one 
answer simply: why? Doesn't this "belongs" perhaps belong to the fiction, too? Is it not permitted 
to be a bit ironical about the subject no less than the predicate and object? Shouldn't philosophers 
be permitted to rise above faith in grammar? All due respect for governesses - but hasn't the time 
come for philosophy to renounce the faith of governesses? 
 
35 
 
O Voltaire! O humaneness! O nonsense! There is something about "truth," about the search for 
truth; and when a human being is too human about it - "il ne cherche le vrai que pour faire le 
bien" - I bet he finds nothing. 
 
36 
 
Suppose nothing else were "given" as real except our world of desires and passions, and we 
could not get down, or up, to any other "reality" besides the reality of our drives - for thinking is 
merely a relations of these drives to each other; is it not permitted to make the experiment and to 
ask the question whether this "given" would not be sufficient for also understanding on the basis 
of this kind of thing the so-called mechanistic (or "material") world? 1, mean, not as a deception, 
as "mere appearance," an "idea" (in the sense of Berkeley and Schopenhauer) but as holding the 
same rank of reality as our affect - as a more primitive form of the world of affects in which 
everything still lies contained in a powerful unity before it undergoes ramifications and 
developments in the organic process (and, as is only fair, also becomes tenderer and weaker) - as 
a kind of instinctive life in which all organic functions are still synthetically intertwined along 
with self-regulation, assimilation, nourishment, excretion, and metabolism - as a pre-form of life. 
In the end not only is it permitted to make this experiment; the conscience of method demands it. 
Not to assume several kinds of causality until the experiment of making do with a single one has 
been pushed to its utmost limit (to the point of nonsense, if I may say so) - that is a moral of 
method which one may not shirk today - it follows "from its definition," as a mathematician 
would say. The question is in the end whether we really recognize the will as efficient, whether 
we believe in the causality of the will: if we do - and at bottom our faith in this is nothing less 
than our faith in causality itself - then we have to make the experiment of positing the causality 
of the will hypothetically as the only one. "Will," of course, can affect only "will" - and not 
"matter" (not "nerves," for example). In short, one has to risk the hypothesis whether will does 
not affect will wherever "effects" are recognized - and whether all mechanical occurrences are 
not, insofar as a force is active in them, will force, effects of will. Suppose, finally, we succeeded 
in explaining our entire instinctive life as the development and ramification of one basic form of 
the will - namely, of the will to power, as my proposition has it; suppose all organic functions 
could be traced back to this will to power and one could also find in it the solution of the 
problem of procreation and nourishment - it is one problem - then one would have gained the 
right to determine all efficient force univocally as - will to power. The world viewed from inside, 
the world defined and determined according to its "intelligible character" - it would be "will to 
power" and nothing else. 
 
37 
 
"What? Doesn't this mean, to speak with the vulgar: God is refuted, but the devil is not?" On the 
contrary! On the contrary, my friends. And, the devil - who forces you to speak with the vulgar? 
 
38 
 
What happened most recently in the broad daylight of modern times in the case of the French 
Revolution - that gruesome farce which, considered closely, was quite superfluous, though noble 
and enthusiastic spectators from all over Europe contemplated it from a distance and interpreted 
it according to their own indignations and enthusiasms for so long, and so passionately, that the 
text finally disappeared - under the interpretation - could happen once more as a noble posterity 
might misunderstand the whole past and in that way alone make it tolerable to look at. Or rather: 
isn't this what has happened even now? haven't we ourselves been this "noble posterity"? And 
isn't now precisely the moment when, insofar as we comprehend this, it is all over? 
 
39 
 
Nobody is very likely to consider a doctrine true merely because it makes people happy or 
virtuous - except perhaps the lovely "idealists" who become effusive about the good, the true, 
and the beautiful and allow all kinds of motley, clumsy, and benevolent desiderata to swim 
around in utter confusion in their pond. Happiness and virtue are no arguments. But people like 
to forget - even sober spirits - that making unhappy and evil are no counterarguments. Something 
might be true while being harmful and dangerous in the highest degree. Indeed, it might be a 
basic characteristic of existence that those who would know it completely would perish, in which 
case the strength of a spirit should be measured according to how much of the "truth" one could 
still barely endure or to put it more clearly, to what degree one would require it to be thinned 
down, shrouded, sweetened, blunted, falsified."' But there is no doubt at all that the evil and 
unhappy are more favored when it comes to the discovery of certain parts of truth, and that the 
probability of their success here is greater - not to speak of the evil who are happy, a species the 
moralists bury in silence. Perhaps hardness and cunning furnish more favorable conditions for 
the origin of the strong, independent spirit and philosopher than that gentle, fine, conciliatory 
good-naturedness and art of taking things lightly which people prize, and prize rightly, in a 
scholar. Assuming first of all that the concept "philosopher" is not restricted to the philosopher 
who writes books - or makes books of his philosophy. A final trait for the image of the free-
spirited philosopher is contributed by Stendhal whom, considering German taste, I do not want to 
fail to stress - for he goes against the German taste. "Pour être bon philosopher" says this last 
great psychologist, "il faut être sec, clair, sans illusion. Un banquier, qui a fait fortune, a une 
partie du caractère requis pour faire des découvertes en philosophie, c'est-à-dire pour voir clair 
dans ce qui est." 
 
40 
 
Whatever is profound loves masks; what is most profound even hates image and parable. Might 
not nothing less than the opposite be the proper disguise for the shame of a god? 2 1 A 
questionable question: it would be odd if some mystic had not risked something to that effect in 
his mind. There are occurrences of such a delicate nature that one does well to cover them up 
with some rudeness to conceal them; there are actions of love and extravagant generosity after 
which nothing is more advisable than to take a stick and give any eyewitness a sound thrashing: 
that would muddle his memory. Some know how to muddle and abuse their own memory in 
order to have their revenge at least against this only witness: shame is inventive. It is not the 
worst things that cause the worst shame: there is not only guile behind a mask - there is so much 
graciousness in cunning. I could imagine that a human being who had to guard something 
precious and vulnerable might roll through life, rude and round as an old green wine cask with 
heavy hoops: the refinement of his shame would want it that way. A man whose sense of shame 
has some profundity encounters his destinies and delicate decisions, too, on paths which few ever 
reach and of whose mere existence his closest intimates must not know: his mortal danger is 
concealed from their eyes, and so is his regained sureness of life. Such a concealed man who 
instinctively needs speech for silence and for burial in silence and who is inexhaustible in his 
evasion of communication, wants and sees to it that a mask of him roams in his place through the 
hearts and heads of his friends. And supposing he did not want it, he would still realize some day 
that in spite of that a mask of him is there - and that this is well. Every profound spirit needs a 
mask: even more, around every profound spirit a mask is growing continually, owing to the 
constantly false, namely shallow, interpretation of every word, every step, every sign of life he 
gives. 
 
41 
 
One has to test oneself to see that one is destined for independence and command - and do it at 
the right time. One should not dodge one's tests, though they may be the most dangerous game 
one could play and are tests that are taken in the end before no witness or judge but ourselves. 
Not to remain stuck to a person - not even the most loved - every person is a prison, also a nook. 
Not to remain stuck to a fatherland - not even if it suffers most and needs help most - it is less 
difficult to sever one's heart from a victorious fatherland. Not to remain stuck to some pity - not 
even for higher men into whose rare torture and helplessness some accident allowed us to look. 
Not to remain stuck to a science - even if it should lure us with the most precious finds that seem 
to have been saved up precisely for us. Not to remain stuck to one's own detachment, to that 
voluptuous remoteness and strangeness of the bird who flees ever higher to see ever more below 
him - the danger of the flier. Not to remain stuck to our own virtues and become as a whole the 
victim of some detail in us, such as our hospitality, which is the danger of dangers for superior 
and rich souls who spend themselves lavishly, almost indifferently, and exaggerate the virtue of 
generosity into a vice. One must know how to conserve oneself: the hardest test of independence. 
 
42 
 
A new species of philosophers is coming up: I venture to baptize them with a name that is not 
free of danger. As I unriddle them, insofar as they allow themselves to be unriddled - for it 
belongs to their nature to want to remain riddles at some point these philosophers of the future 
may have a right - it might also be a wrong - to be called attempters. This name itself is in the 
end a mere attempt and, if you will, a temptation. 
 
43 
 
Are these coming philosophers new friends of "truth"? That is probable enough, for all 
philosophers so far have loved their truths. But they will certainly not be dogmatists. It must 
offend their pride, also their taste, if their truth is supposed to be a truth for every man - which 
has so far been the secret wish and hidden meaning of all dogmatic aspirations. "My judgment is 
my judgment": no one else is easily entitled to it - that is what such a philosopher of the future 
may perhaps say of himself. One must shed the bad taste of wanting to agree with many. "Good" 
is no longer good when one's neighbor mouths it. And how should there be a "common good"! 
The term contradicts itself: whatever can be common always has little value. In the end it must 
be as it is and always has been: great things remain for the great, abysses for the profound, 
nuances and shudders for the refined, and, in brief, all that is rare for the rare. 
 
44 
 
Need I still say expressly after all this that they, too, will be free, very free spirits, these 
philosophers of the future - though just as certainly they will not be merely free spirits but 
something more, higher, greater, and thoroughly different that does not want to be misunderstood 
and mistaken for something else. But saying this I feel an obligation - almost as much to them as 
to ourselves who are their heralds and precursors, we free spirits - to sweep away a stupid old 
prejudice and misunderstanding about the lot of us: all too long it has clouded the concept "free 
spirit" like a fog. In all the countries of Europe, and in America, too, there now is something that 
abuses this name: a very narrow, imprisoned, chained type of spirits who want just about the 
opposite of what accords with our intentions and instincts - not to speak of the fact that regarding 
the new philosophers who are coming up they must assuredly be closed windows and bolted 
doors. They belong, briefly and sadly, among the levelers - these falsely so-called "free spirits" - 
being eloquent and prolifically scribbling slaves of the democratic taste and its "modern ideas"; 
they are all human beings without solitude, without their own solitude, clumsy good fellows 
whom one should not deny either courage or respectable decency - only they are unfree and 
ridiculously superficial, above all in their basic inclination to find in the forms of the old society 
as it has existed so far just about the cause of all human misery and failure - which is a way of 
standing truth happily upon her head! What they would like to strive for with all their powers is 
the universal green-pasture happiness of the herd, with security, lack danger, comfort, and an 
easier life for everyone; the two songs and doctrines which they repeat most often "equality of 
rights" and , "sympathy for all that suffers" - and suffering itself they take for something that 
must be abolished. We opposite men, having opened our eyes and conscience to the question 
where and how the plant "man" has so far grown most vigorously to a height - we think that this 
has happened every time under the opposite conditions, that to this end the dangerousness of his 
situation must first grow to the point of enormity, his power of invention and simulation (his 
"spirit") had to develop under prolonged pressure and constraint into refinement and audacity, 
his life - will had to be enhanced into an unconditional power will. We think that hardness, 
forcefulness, slavery, danger in the alley and the heart, life in hiding, stoicism, the art of 
experiment and devilry of every kind, that everything evil, terrible, tyrannical in man, everything 
in him that is kin to beasts of prey and serpents, serves the enhancement of the species "man" as 
much as its opposite does. Indeed, we do not even say enough when we say only that much; and 
at any rate we are at this point, in what we say and keep silent about, at the other end from all 
modem ideology and herd desiderata - as their antipodes perhaps? Is it any wonder that we "free 
spirits" are not exactly the most communicative spirits? that we do not want to betray in every 
particular from what a spirit can liberate himself and to what he may then be driven? And as for 
the meaning of the dangerous formula "beyond good and evil," with which we at least guard 
against being mistaken for others: we are something different from "libres-penseurs," "liberi 
pensatori," "Freidenker", and whatever else all these goodly advocates of "modern ideas" like to 
call themselves. At home, or at least having been guests, in many countries of the spirit; having 
escaped again and again from the musty agreeable nooks into which preference and prejudice, 
youth, origin, the accidents of people and books or even exhaustion from wandering seemed to 
have banished us; full of malice against the lures of dependence that lie hidden in honors, or 
money, or offices, or enthusiasms of the senses; grateful even to need and vacillating sickness 
because they always rid us from some rule and its "prejudice," grateful to god, devil, sheep, and 
worm in us; curious to a vice, investigators to the point of cruelty, with uninhibited fingers for 
the unfathomable, with teeth and stomachs for the most indigestible, ready for every feat that 
requires a sense of acuteness and acute senses, ready for every venture, thanks to an excess of 
"free will," with fore- and back-souls into whose ultimate intentions nobody can look so easily, 
with fore- and backgrounds which no foot is likely to explore to the end; concealed under cloaks 
of light, conquerors even if we look like heirs and prodigals, arrangers and collectors from 
morning till late, misers of our riches and our crammed drawers, economical in learning and 
forgetting, inventive in schemas, occasionally proud of tables of categories, occasionally 
pedants, occasionally night owls of work even in broad daylight; yes, when it is necessary even 
scarecrows - and today it is necessary; namely, insofar as we are born, sworn, jealous friends of 
solitude, of our own most profound, most midnightly, most middaily solitude: that is the type of 
man we are, we free spirits! And perhaps you have something of this, too, you that are coming? 
you new philosophers? 
Beyond Good And Evil 
By: Friedrich Nietzsche 
 
Part Three : The Religious Nature 
 
45 
 
The human soul and its frontiers, the compass of human inner experience in general attained 
hitherto, the heights, depths and distances of this experience, the entire history of the soul 
hitherto and its still unexhausted possibilities: this is the predestined hunting‑ground for a born 
psychologist and lover of the `big‑game hunt'. But how often must he say despairingly to 
himself: `one man! alas, but one man! and this great forest and jungle!' And thus he wishes he 
had a few hundred beaters and subtle well‑instructed tracker dogs whom he could send into the 
history of the human soul and there round up his game. In vain: he discovers again and again, 
thoroughly and bitterly, how hard it is to find beaters and dogs for all the things which arouse his 
curiosity. The drawback in sending scholars out into new and dangerous hunting‑grounds where 
courage, prudence, subtlety in every sense are needed is that they cease to be of any use precisely 
where the `big hunt', but also the big danger, begins ‑ precisely there do they lose their keenness 
of eye and keenness of nose. To divine and establish, for example, what sort of history the 
problem of knowledge and conscience has had in the soul of homines religiosi one would oneself 
perhaps have to be as profound, as wounded, as monstrous as Pascal's intellectual conscience 
was ‑ and then there would still be needed that broad heaven of bright, malicious spirituality 
capable of looking down on this turmoil of dangerous and painful experiences, surveying and 
ordering them and forcing them into formulas. ‑ But who could do me this service! And who 
could have the time to wait for such servants! ‑ they appear too rarely, they are at all times so 
very improbable! In the end one has to do everything oneself if one is to know a few things 
oneself that is to say, one has much to do! ‑ But a curiosity like mine is after all the most 
pleasurable of vices ‑ I beg your pardon! I meant to say: the love of truth has its reward in 
Heaven, and already upon earth.- 
 
46 
 
The faith such as primitive Christianity demanded and not infrequently obtained in the midst of a 
skeptical and southerly free‑spirited world with a centuries‑long struggle between philosophical 
schools behind it and in it, plus the education in tolerance provided by the Imperium Romanum ‑ 
this faith is not that gruff, true‑hearted liegeman's faith with which a Luther, say, or a Cromwell, 
or some other northern barbarian of the spirit cleaved to his God and his Christianity; it is rather 
that faith of Pascal which resembles in a terrible fashion a protracted suicide of reason ‑ of a 
tough, long‑lived, wormlike reason which is not to be killed instantaneously with a single blow. 
The Christian faith is from the beginning sacrifice: sacrifice of all freedom, all pride, all 
self‑confidence of the spirit, at the same time enslavement and self‑mockery, self-mutilation. 
There is cruelty and religious Phoenicianism in this faith exacted of an over‑ripe, manifold and 
much‑indulged conscience: its presupposition is that the subjection of the spirit is indescribably 
painful, that the entire past and habitude of such a spirit resists the absurdissimum which `faith' 
appears to it to be. Modern men, with their obtuseness to all Christian nomenclature, no longer 
sense the gruesome superlative which lay for an antique taste in the paradoxical formula `god on 
the cross'. Never and nowhere has there hitherto been a comparable boldness in inversion, 
anything so fearsome, questioning and questionable, as this formula: it promised a revaluation of 
all antique values. ‑ It is the orient, the innermost orient, it is the oriental slave who in this 
fashion took vengeance on Rome and its noble and frivolous tolerance, on Roman `catholicism' 
of faith ‑ and it has never been faith but always freedom from faith, that half‑stoical and smiling 
unconcern with the seriousness of faith, that has enraged slaves in their masters and against their 
masters. `Enlightenment' enrages: for the slave wants the unconditional, he understands in the 
domain of morality too only the tyrannical, he loves as he hates, without nuance, into the depths 
of him, to the point of pain, to the point of sickness ‑ the great hidden suffering he feels is 
enraged at the noble taste which seems to deny suffering. Skepticism towards suffering, at 
bottom no more than a pose of aristocratic morality, was likewise not the least contributory cause 
of the last great slave revolt which began with the French Revolution. 
 
47 
 
Wherever the religious neurosis has hitherto appeared on earth we find it tied to three dangerous 
dietary prescriptions: solitude, fasting and sexual abstinence ‑ but without our being able to 
decide with certainty which is cause here and which effect, or whether any relation of cause and 
effect is involved here at all. The justification of the latter doubt is that one of the most frequent 
symptoms of the condition, in the case of savage and tame peoples, is the most sudden and most 
extravagant voluptuousness which is then, just as suddenly, reversed into a convulsion of 
penitence and a denial of world and will: both perhaps interpretable as masked epilepsy? But 
nowhere is it more necessary to renounce interpretations: around no other type has there grown 
up such an abundance of nonsense and superstition, none seems to have hitherto interested men, 
even philosophers, more ‑ the time has come to cool down a little on this matter, to learn 
caution: better, to look away, to go away. ‑ Still in the background of the most recent 
philosophy, the Schopenhaueran, there stands, almost as the problem in itself, this gruesome 
question‑mark of the religious crisis and awakening. How is denial of the will possible? How is 
the saint possible? ‑ this really seems to have been the question over which Schopenhauer 
became a philosopher and set to work. And thus it showed a genuinely Schopenhaueran outcome 
that his most convinced adherent (perhaps also his last adherent, so far as Germany is concerned 
‑), namely Richard Wagner, brought his own life's work to an end at precisely this point and at 
last introduced that dreadful and eternal type onto the stage as Kundry, type vécu, just as it is; 
and at the very time when the psychiatrists of almost all the nations of Europe had an opportunity 
of studying it at close quarters wherever the religious neurosis or, as I call it, `the religious 
nature' ‑ staged its latest epidemic parade and outbreak as the `Salvation Army'. – But if one asks 
what it has really been in this whole phenomenon of the saint that has interested men of all types 
and ages, even philosophers, so immoderately, then the answer is, beyond doubt, the appearance 
of the miraculous adhering to it, namely the direct succession of opposites, of morally 
antithetical states of soul: here it seemed a palpable fact that a `bad man' all at once became a 
`saint', a good man. Psychology has hitherto come to grief at this point: has it not been 
principally because it has acknowledged the dominion of morality, because it itself believed in 
antithetical moral values and saw, read, interpreted these antitheses into the text and the facts? 
What? The `miracle' only an error of interpretation? A lack of philology? 
 
48 
 
It seems that their Catholicism is much more an intrinsic part of the Latin races than the whole of 
Christianity in general is of us northerners; and that unbelief consequently signifies something 
altogether different in Catholic countries from what it does in Protestant ‑ namely a kind of 
revolt against the spirit of the race, while with us it is rather a return to the spirit (or lack of spirit 
‑) of the race. We northerners are undoubtedly descended from barbarian races also in respect of 
our talent for religion: we have little talent for it. We may except the Celts, who therefore 
supplied the best soil for the reception of the Christian infection in the north ‑ the Christian ideal 
came to blossom, so far as the pale northern sun permitted it, in France. How uncongenially 
pious are to our taste even these latest French sceptics when they have in them any Celtic blood! 
How Catholic, how un-German does Auguste Comte's sociology smell to us with its Roman 
logic of the instincts! How Jesuitical that clever and charming cicerone of Port‑Royal, 
Sainte‑Beuve, despite all his hostility towards the Jesuits! And even more so Ernest Renan: how 
inaccessible to us northerners is the language of a Renan, in whom every other minute some 
nothingness of religious tension topples a soul which is in a refined sense voluptuous and 
relaxed! Repeat these beautiful words of his ‑ and what malice and high spirits are at once 
aroused in reply in our probably less beautiful and sterner, that is to say German, souls: ‑ 
`Disons donc hardiment que la religion est un produit de l'homme normal, que l'homme est le 
plus dans le vrai quand il est le plus religieux et le plus assuré d'une destinée infinie . . . C'est 
quand il est bon qu'il veut que la vertu corresponde a une ordre éternelle, c'est quand il 
contemple les choses d’une manière désinteressée qu'il trouve la mort révoltante et absurde. 
Comment ne pas supposer que c'est dans ces moments-ci, que l'homme voit le mieux?. . .' These 
words are so totally antipodal to my ears and habits that when I discovered them my immediate 
anger wrote beside them `la niaiserie religieuse par excellence!' ‑ until my subsequent anger 
actually began to like them, these words with their upside‑down‑truth! It is so pleasant, so 
distinguishing, to possess one's own antipodes! 
 
49 
 
What astonishes one about the religiosity of the ancient Greeks is the tremendous amount of 
gratitude that emanates from it ‑ the kind of man who stands thus before nature and before life is 
a very noble one! ‑ Later, when the rabble came to predominate in Greece, fear also overran 
religion; and Christianity was preparing itself. 
 
50 
 
The passion for God: there is the peasant, true‑hearted and importunate kind, like Luther's ‑ the 
whole of Protestantism lacks southern delicatezza. There is an oriental ecstatic kind, like that of a 
slave who has been undeservedly pardoned and elevated, as for example in the case of 
Augustine, who lacks in an offensive manner all nobility of bearing and desire. There is the 
womanly tender and longing kind which presses bashfully and ignorantly for a unio mystica et 
physica: as in the case of Madame de Guyon. In many cases it appears strangely enough as a 
disguise for the puberty of a girl or a youth; now and then even as the hysteria of an old maid, 
also as her final ambition ‑ the church has more than once canonized the woman in question. 
 
51 
 
Hitherto the mightiest men have still bowed down reverently before the saint as the enigma of 
self‑constraint and voluntary final renunciation: why did they bow? They sensed in him as it 
were behind the question‑mark presented by his fragile and miserable appearance ‑ the superior 
force that sought to prove itself through such a constraint, the strength of will in which they 
recognized and knew how to honour their own strength and joy in ruling: they honoured 
something in themselves when they honoured the saint. In addition to this, the sight of the saint 
aroused a suspicion in them: such an enormity of denial, of anti‑nature, will not have been 
desired for nothing, they said to themselves. Is there perhaps a reason for it, a very great danger 
about which the ascetic, thanks to his secret visitors and informants, might possess closer 
knowledge? Enough, the mighty of the world learned in face of him a new fear, they sensed a 
new power, a strange enemy as yet unsubdued ‑ it was the `will to power' which constrained 
them to halt before the saint. They had to question him ‑. 
 
52 
 
In the Jewish `Old Testament', the book of divine justice, there are men, things and speeches of 
so grand a style that Greek and Indian literature have nothing to set beside it. One stands in 
reverence and trembling before these remnants of what man once was and has sorrowful 
thoughts about old Asia and its little jutting‑out promontory Europe, which would like to signify 
as against Asia the `progress of man'. To be sure: he who is only a measly tame domestic animal 
and knows only the needs of a domestic animal (like our cultured people of today, the Christians 
of `cultured' Christianity included ‑) has no reason to wonder, let alone to sorrow, among those 
ruins ‑ the taste for the Old Testament is a touchstone in regard to `great' and `small' ‑ : perhaps 
he will find the New Testament, the book of mercy, more after his own heart (there is in it a great 
deal of the genuine delicate, musty odour of devotee and petty soul). To have glued this New 
Testament, a species of rococo taste in every respect, on to the Old Testament to form a single 
book, as `bible', as `the book of books': that is perhaps the greatest piece of temerity and `sin 
against the spirit' that literary Europe has on its conscience. 
 
53 
 
Why atheism today? ‑ `The father' in God is thoroughly refuted; likewise `the judge', `the 
rewarder'. Likewise his `free will': he does not hear ‑ and if he heard he would still not know 
how to help. The worst thing is: he seems incapable of making himself clearly understood: is he 
himself vague about what he means? ‑ These are what, in the course of many conversations, 
asking and listening, I found to be the causes of the decline of European theism; it seems to me 
that the religious instinct is indeed in vigorous growth ‑ but that it rejects the theistic answer 
with profound mistrust. 
 
54 
 
What, at bottom, is the whole of modern philosophy doing? Since Descartes ‑ and indeed rather 
in spite of him than on the basis of his precedent ‑ all philosophers have been making an attentat 
on the ancient soul concept under the cloak of a critique of the subject‑and‑predicate concept ‑ 
that is to say, an attentat on the fundamental presupposition of Christian doctrine. Modern 
philosophy, as an epistemological scepticism, is, covertly or openly, anti‑Christian: although, to 
speak to more refined ears, by no means anti‑religious. For in the past one believed in `the soul' 
as one believed in grammar and the grammatical subject: one said `I' is the condition, `think' is 
the predicate and conditioned ‑ thinking is an activity to which a subject must be thought of as 
cause. Then one tried with admirable artfulness and tenacity to fathom whether one could not get 
out of this net ‑ whether the reverse was not perhaps true: `think' the condition, `I' conditioned; 'I' 
thus being only a synthesis produced by thinking. Kant wanted fundamentally to prove that, 
starting from the subject, the subject could not be proved ‑ nor could the object: the possibility of 
an apparent existence of the subject, that is to say of `the soul', may not always have been remote 
from him, that idea which, as the philosophy of the Vedanta, has exerted immense influence on 
earth before. 
 
55 
 
There is a great ladder of religious cruelty with many rungs; but three of them are the most 
important. At one time one sacrificed human beings to one's god, perhaps precisely those human 
beings one loved best —the sacrifice of the first-born present in all prehistoric religions belongs 
here, as does the sacrifice of the Emperor Tiberius in the Mithras grotto on the isle of Capri, that 
most horrible of all Roman anachronisms. Then, in the moral epoch of mankind, one sacrificed 
to one's god the strongest instincts one possessed, one's `nature'; the joy of thin festival glitters in 
the cruel glance of the ascetic, the inspired `anti?naturist'. Finally: what was left to be sacrificed? 
Did one not finally have to sacrifice everything comforting, holy, healing, all hope, all faith in a 
concealed harmony, in a future bliss and justice? Did one not have to sacrifice God himself and 
out of cruelty against oneself worship stone, stupidity, gravity, fate, nothingness? To sacrifice 
God for nothingness—this paradoxical mystery of the ultimate act of cruelty was reserved for the 
generation which is even now arising: we all know something of it already. 
 
56 
 
He who, prompted by some enigmatic desire, has, like me, long endeavoured to think pessimism 
through to the bottom and to redeem it from the half‑Christian, half‑German simplicity and 
narrowness with which it finally presented itself to this century, namely in the form of the 
Schopenhaueran philosophy; he who has really gazed with an Asiatic and more than Asiatic eye 
down into the most world‑denying of all possible modes of thought ‑ beyond good and evil and 
no longer, like Buddha and Schopenhauer, under the spell and illusion of morality ‑ perhaps by 
that very act, and without really intending to, may have had his eyes opened to the opposite 
ideal: to the ideal of the most exuberant, most living and most world‑affirming man, who has not 
only learned to get on and treat with all that was and is but who wants to have it again as it was 
and is to all eternity, insatiably calling out da capo not only to himself but to the whole piece and 
play, and not only to a play but fundamentally to him who needs precisely this play ‑ and who 
makes it necessary: because he needs himself again and again ‑ and makes himself necessary ‑ 
What? And would this not be ‑ circulus vitiosus deus? 
 
57 
 
With the strength of his spiritual sight and insight the distance, and as it were the space, around 
man continually expands: his world grows deeper, ever new stars, ever new images and enigmas 
come into view. Perhaps everything on which the spirit's eye has exercised its profundity and 
acuteness has been really but an opportunity for its exercise, a game, something for children and 
the childish. Perhaps the most solemn concepts which have occasioned the most strife and 
suffering, the concepts `God' and `sin', will one day seem to us of no more importance than a 
child's toy and a child's troubles seem to an old man ‑ and perhaps `old man' will then have need 
of another toy and other troubles ‑ still enough of a child, an eternal child! 
 
58 
 
Has it been observed to what extent a genuine religious life (both for its favourite labour of 
microscopic self‑examination and that gentle composure which calls itself `prayer' and which is 
a constant readiness for the `coming of God'‑) requires external leisure or semi‑leisure, I mean 
leisure with a good conscience, inherited, by blood, which is not altogether unfamiliar with the 
aristocratic idea that work degrades ‑ that is to say, makes soul and body common? And that 
consequently modern, noisy, time‑consuming, proud and stupidly proud industriousness 
educates and prepares precisely for `unbelief' more than anything else does? Among those in 
Germany for example who nowadays live without religion, I find people whose `free‑thinking' is 
of differing kinds and origins but above all a majority of those in whom industriousness from 
generation to generation has extinguished the religious instincts: so that they no longer have any 
idea what religions are supposed to be for and as it were merely register their existence in the 
world with a kind of dumb amazement. They feel they are already fully occupied, these worthy 
people, whether with their businesses or with their pleasures, not to speak of the `fatherland' and 
the newspapers and `family duties': it seems that they have no time at all left for religion, 
especially as it is not clear to them whether it involves another business or another pleasure ‑ for 
they tell themselves it is not possible that one goes to church simply to make oneself miserable. 
They are not opposed to religious usages; if participation in such usages is demanded in certain 
cases, by the state for instance, they do what is demanded of them as one does so many things ‑ 
with patient and modest seriousness and without much curiosity and discomfort ‑ it is only that 
they live too much aside and outside even to feel the need for any for or against in such things. 
The great majority of German middle‑class Protestants can today be numbered among these 
indifferent people, especially in the great industrious centres of trade and commerce; likewise the 
great majority of industrious scholars and the entire university equipage (excepting the 
theologians, whose possibility and presence there provides the psychologist with ever more and 
ever subtler enigmas to solve). Pious or even merely church‑going people seldom realize how 
much good will, one might even say willfulness, it requires nowadays for a German scholar to 
take the problem of religion seriously; his whole trade (and, as said above, the tradesmanlike 
industriousness to which his modern conscience obliges him) disposes him to a superior, almost 
good‑natured merriment in regard to religion, sometimes mixed with a mild contempt directed at 
the `uncleanliness' of spirit which he presupposes wherever one still belongs to the church. It is 
only with the aid of history (thus not from his personal experience) that the scholar succeeds in 
summoning up a reverent seriousness and a certain shy respect towards religion; but if he 
intensifies his feelings towards it even to the point of feeling grateful to it, he has still in his own 
person not got so much as a single step closer to that which still exists as church or piety: 
perhaps the reverse. The practical indifference to religious things in which he was born and 
raised is as a rule sublimated in him into a caution and cleanliness which avoids contact with 
religious people and things; and it can be precisely the depth of his tolerance and humanity that 
bids him evade the subtle distress which tolerance itself brings with it. ‑ Every age has its own 
divine kind of naivety for the invention of which other ages may envy it ‑ and how much 
naivety, venerable, childlike and boundlessly stupid naivety there is in the scholar's belief in his 
superiority, in the good conscience of his tolerance, in the simple unsuspecting certainty with 
which his instinct treats the religious man as an inferior and lower type which he himself has 
grown beyond and above ‑ he, the little presumptuous dwarf and man of the mob, the brisk and 
busy head‑ and handyman of `ideas', of `modern ideas'! 
 
59 
 
He who has seen deeply into the world knows what wisdom there is in the fact that men are 
superficial It is their instinct for preservation which teaches them to be fickle, light and false. 
Here and there, among philosophers as well as artists, one finds a passionate and exaggerated 
worship of `pure forms': let no one doubt that he who needs the cult of surfaces to that extent has 
at some time or other made a calamitous attempt to get beneath them. Perhaps there might even 
exist an order of rank in regard to these burnt children, these born artists who can find pleasure in 
life only in the intention of falsifying its image (as it were in a long‑drawn‑out revenge on life 
‑): one could determine the degree to which life has been spoiled for them by the extent to which 
they want to see its image falsified, attenuated and made otherworldly and divine ‑ one could 
include the homines religiosi among the artists as their highest rank. It is the profound suspicious 
fear of an incurable pessimism which compels whole millennia to cling with their teeth to ‑a 
religious interpretation of existence: the fear born of that instinct which senses that one might get 
hold of the truth too soon, before mankind was sufficiently strong, sufficiently hard, sufficient of 
an artist . . . Piety, the `life in God', would, viewed in this light, appear as the subtlest and 
ultimate product of the fear of truth, as the artist's worship of an intoxication before the most 
consistent of all falsifications, as the will to inversion of truth, to untruth at any price. Perhaps 
there has up till now been no finer way of making man himself more beautiful than piety: 
through piety man can become to so great a degree of art, surface, play of colours, goodness, that 
one no longer suffers at the sight of him. 
 
60 
 
To love men for the sake of God ‑that has been the noblest and most remote feeling attained to 
among men up till now. That love of man without some sanctifying ulterior objective is one 
piece of stupidity and animality more, that the inclination to this love of man has first to receive 
its measure, its refinement, its grain of salt and drop of amber from a higher inclination whatever 
man it was who first felt and `experienced' this, however much his tongue may have faltered as it 
sought to express such a delicate thought, let him be holy and venerated to us for all time as the 
man who has soared the highest and gone the most beautifully astray! 
 
61 
 
The philosopher as we understand him, we free spirits ‑ as the man of the most comprehensive 
responsibility who has the conscience for the collective evolution of mankind: this philosopher 
will make use of the religions for his work of education and breeding, just as he will make use of 
existing political and economic conditions. The influence on selection and breeding, that is to say 
the destructive as well as the creative and formative influence which can be exercised with the 
aid of the religions, is manifold and various depending on the kind of men placed under their 
spell and protection. For the strong and independent prepared and predestined for command, in 
whom the art and reason of a ruling race is incarnated, religion is one more means of overcoming 
resistance so as to be able to rule: as a bond that unites together ruler and ruled and betrays and 
hands over to the former the consciences of the latter, all that is hidden and most intimate in 
them which would like to exclude itself from obedience; and if some natures of such noble 
descent incline through lofty spirituality to a more withdrawn and meditative life and reserve to 
themselves only the most refined kind of rule (over select disciples or brothers), then religion can 
even be used as a means of obtaining peace from the noise and effort of cruder modes of 
government, and cleanliness from the necessary dirt of all politics. Thus did the Brahmins, for 
example, arrange things: with the aid of a religious organization they gave themselves the power 
of nominating their kings for the people, while keeping and feeling themselves aside and outside 
as men of higher and more than kingly tasks. In the meantime, religion also gives a section of the 
ruled guidance and opportunity for preparing itself for future rule and command; that is to say, 
those slowly rising orders and classes in which through fortunate marriage customs the strength 
and joy of the will, the will to self‑mastery is always increasing ‑ religion presents them with 
sufficient instigations and temptations to take the road to higher spirituality, to test the feelings of 
great self‑overcoming, of silence and solitude ‑ asceticism and puritanism are virtually 
indispensable means of education and ennobling if a race wants to become master over its 
origins in the rabble, and work its way up towards future rule. To ordinary men, finally, the great 
majority, who exist for service and general utility and who may exist only for that purpose, 
religion gives an invaluable contentment with their nature and station, manifold peace of heart, 
an ennobling of obedience, one piece of joy and sorrow more to share with their fellows, and 
some transfiguration of the whole everydayness, the whole lowliness, the whole half‑bestial 
poverty of their souls. Religion and the religious significance of life sheds sunshine over these 
perpetual drudges and makes their own sight tolerable to them, it has the effect which an 
Epicurean philosophy usually has on sufferers of a higher rank, refreshing, refining, as it were 
making the most use of suffering, ultimately even sanctifying and justifying. Perhaps nothing in 
Christianity and Buddhism is so venerable as their art of teaching even the lowliest to set 
themselves through piety in an apparently higher order of things and thus to preserve their 
contentment with the real order, within which they live hard enough lives ‑ and necessarily have 
to! 
 
62 
 
In the end, to be sure, to present the debit side of the account to these religions and to bring into 
the light of day their uncanny perilousness ‑ it costs dear and terribly when religions hold sway, 
not as means of education and breeding in the hands of the philosopher, but in their own right 
and as sovereign, when they themselves want to be final ends and not means beside other means. 
Among men, as among every other species, there is a surplus of failures, of the sick, the 
degenerate, the fragile, of those who are bound to suffer; the successful cases are, among men 
too, always the exception, and. considering that man is the animal whose nature has not yet been 
fixed, the rare exception. But worse still: the higher the type of man a man represents, the greater 
the improbability he will turn out well: chance, the law of absurdity in the total economy of 
mankind, shows itself in its most dreadful shape in its destructive effect on higher men, whose 
conditions of life are subtle, manifold and difficult to compute. Now what is the attitude of the 
above‑named two chief religions towards this surplus of unsuccessful cases? They seek to 
preserve, to retain in life, whatever can in any way be preserved, indeed they side with it as a 
matter of principle as religions for sufferers, they maintain that all those who suffer from life as 
from an illness are in the right, and would like every other feeling of life to be counted false and 
become impossible. However highly one may rate this kindly preservative solicitude, inasmuch 
as, together with all the other types of man, it has been and is applied to the highest type, which 
has hitherto almost always been the type that has suffered most: in the total accounting the 
hitherto sovereign religions are among the main reasons the type `man' has been kept on a lower 
level they have preserved too much of that which ought to perish. We have inestimable benefits 
to thank them for; and who is sufficiently rich in gratitude not to be impoverished in face of all 
that the `spiritual men' of Christianity, for example, have hitherto done for Europe! And yet, 
when they gave comfort to the suffering, courage to the oppressed and despairing, a staff and 
stay to the irresolute, and lured those who were inwardly shattered and had become savage away 
from society into monasteries and houses of correction for the soul: what did they have to do in 
addition so as thus, with a good conscience, as a matter of principle, to work at the preservation 
of everything sick and suffering, which means in fact and truth at the corruption of the European 
race? Stand all evaluations on their head ‑ that is what they had to do! And smash the strong, 
contaminate great hopes, cast suspicion on joy in beauty, break down everything autocratic, 
manly, conquering, tyrannical, all the instincts proper to the highest and most successful of the 
type `man', into uncertainty, remorse of conscience, self‑destruction, indeed reverse the whole 
love of the earthly and of dominion over the earth into hatred of the earth and the earthly ‑ that is 
the task the church set itself and had to set itself, until in its evaluation 'unworldliness', 
`unsensuality', and `higher man' were finally fused together into one feeling. Supposing one were 
able to view the strangely painful and at the same time coarse and subtle comedy of European 
Christianity with the mocking and unconcerned eye of an Epicurean god, I believe there would 
be no end to one's laughter and amazement: for does it not seem that one will has dominated 
Europe for eighteen centuries, the will to make of man a sublime abortion? But he who, with an 
opposite desire, no longer Epicurean but with some divine hammer in his hand, approached this 
almost deliberate degeneration and stunting of man such as constitutes the European Christian 
(Pascal for instance), would he not have to cry out in rage, in pity, in horror: `O you fools, you 
presumptuous, pitying fools, what have you done! Was this a work for your hands! How you 
have bungled and botched my beautiful stone! What a thing for you to take upon yourselves!' ‑ 
What I am saying is: Christianity has been the most fatal kind of self‑presumption ever. Men not 
high or hard enough for the artistic refashioning of mankind; men not strong or farsighted 
enough for the sublime self‑constraint needed to allow the foreground law of thousandfold 
failure and perishing to prevail; men not noble enough to see the abysmal disparity in order of 
rank and abysm of rank between men and man ‑ it is such men who, with their `equal before 
God', have hitherto ruled over the destiny of Europe, until at last a shrunken, almost ludicrous 
species, a herd animal, something full of good will, sickly and mediocre has been bred, the 
European of today . . . 
Beyond Good And Evil 
By: Friedrich Nietzsche 
 
Part Four : Maxims and Interludes 
 
63 
 
He who is a teacher from the very heart takes all things seriously only with reference to his 
students ‑ even himself. 
 
64 
 
'Knowledge for its own sake' ‑ this is the last snare set by morality: one therewith gets 
completely entangled with it once more. 
 
65 
 
The charm of knowledge would be small if so much shame did not have to be overcome on the 
road to it. 
 
65a 
 
One is most dishonest towards one's God: he is not permitted to sin! 
 
66 
 
The inclination to disparage himself, to let himself be robbed, lied to and exploited, could be the 
self‑effacement of a god among men. 
 
67 
 
Love of one is a piece of barbarism: for it is practised at the expense of all others. Love of God 
likewise. 
 
68 
 
'I have done that,' says my memory. 'I cannot have done that' ‑ says my pride, and remains 
adamant. At last ‑ memory yields. 
 
69 
 
One has been a bad spectator of life if one has not also seen the hand that in a considerate fashion 
‑ kills. 
 
70 
 
If one has character one also has one's typical experience which recurs again and again. 
 
71 
 
The sage as astronomer. ‑ As long as you still feel the stars as being something 'over you' you 
still lack the eye of the man of knowledge. 
 
72 
 
It is not the strength but the duration of exalted sensations which makes exalted men. 
 
73 
 
He who attains his ideal by that very fact transcends it. 
 
73a 
 
Many a peacock hides his peacock tail from all eyes ‑ and calls it his pride. 
 
74 
 
A man with genius is unendurable if he does not also possess at least two other things: gratitude 
and cleanliness. 
 
75 
 
The degree and kind of a man's sexuality reaches up into the topmost summit of his spirit. 
 
76 
 
Under conditions of peace the warlike man attacks himself. 
 
77 
 
With one's principles one seeks to tyrannize over one's habits or to justify or honour or scold or 
conceal them ‑ two people with the same principles probably seek something fundamentally 
different with them. 
 
78 
 
He who despises himself still nonetheless respects himself as one who despises. 
 
79 
 
A soul which knows it is loved but does not itself love betrays its dregs ‑ its lowest part comes 
up. 
 
80 
 
A thing explained is a thing we have no further concern with. ‑‑ What did that god mean who 
counselled: `know thyself!'? Does that perhaps mean: `Have no further concern with thyself! 
become objective!' ‑ And Socrates? ‑ And the `man of science'?- 
 
81 
 
It is dreadful to die of thirst in the sea. Do you have to salt your truth so much that it can no 
longer even ‑ quench thirst? 
 
82 
 
`Pity for all' ‑ would be harshness and tyranny for  you, my neighbour! 
 
83 
 
Instinct ‑ When the house burns down one forgets even one's dinner. ‑ Yes: but one retrieves it 
from the ashes. 
 
84 
 
Woman learns how to hate to the extent that she unlearns how ‑ to charm. 
 
85 
 
The same emotions in man and woman are, however, different in tempo: therefore man and 
woman never cease to misunderstand one another. 
 
86 
 
Behind all their personal vanity women themselves always have their impersonal contempt ‑ for 
`woman'. 
 
87 
 
Bound heart, free spirit ‑ If one binds one's heart firmly and imprisons it one can allow one's 
spirit many liberties: I have said that before. But no one believes it if he does not already know it 
. . . 
 
88 
 
One begins to mistrust very clever people when they become embarrassed. 
 
89 
 
Terrible experiences make one wonder whether he who experiences them is not something 
terrible. 
 
90 
 
Heavy, melancholy people grow lighter through precisely that which makes others heavy, 
through hatred and love, and for a while they rise to their surface. 
 
91 
 
So cold, so icy one burns one's fingers on him! Every hand that grasps him starts back! ‑ And for 
just that reason many think he is growing hot. 
 
92 
 
Who has not for the sake of his reputation ‑ sacrificed himself? 
 
93 
 
There is no hatred for men in geniality, but for just that reason all too much , contempt for men. 
 
94 
 
Mature manhood: that means to have rediscovered the seriousness one had as a child at play. 
 
95 
 
To be ashamed of one's immorality: that is a step on the ladder at the end of which one is also 
ashamed of one's morality. 
 
96 
 
One ought to depart from life as Odysseus departed from Nausicaa ‑ blessing rather than in love 
with it. 
 
97 
 
What? A great man? I always see only the actor of his own ideal. 
 
98 
 
If one trains one's conscience it will kiss us as it bites. 
 
99 
 
The disappointed man speaks. ‑ `I listened for an echo and I heard only praise ‑.' 
 
100 
 
Before ourselves we all pose as being simpler than we are: thus do we take a rest from our fellow 
men. 
 
101 
 
Today a man of knowledge might easily feel as if he were God become animal. 
 
102 
 
To discover he is loved in return ought really to disenchant the lover with the beloved. `What? 
She is so modest as to love even you? Or so stupid? Or ‑ or ‑.' 
 
103 
 
The danger in happiness. ‑ `Now everything is turning out well for me, now I love every destiny 
‑ who would like to be my destiny?' 
 
104 
 
It is not their love for men but the impotence of their love for men which hinders the Christians 
of today from ‑ burning us. 
 
105 
 
The free spirit, the `pious man of knowledge' ‑ finds pia fraus even more offensive to his taste 
(to his kind of `piety') than impia fraus. Hence the profound lack of understanding of the church 
typical of the `free spirit' ‑ his kind of unfreedom. 
 
106 
 
By means of music the passions enjoy themselves. 
 
107 
 
To close your ears to even the best counter‑argument once the decision has been taken: sign of a 
strong character. Thus an occasional will to stupidity. 
 
108 
 
There are no moral phenomena at all, only a moral interpretation of phenomena. . . 
 
109 
 
The criminal is often enough not equal to his deed: he disparages and slanders it. 
 
110 
 
A criminal's lawyers are seldom artists enough to turn the beautiful terribleness of the deed to the 
advantage of him who did it 
 
111. 
 
Our vanity is hardest to wound precisely when our pride has just been wounded. 
 
112 
 
He who feels predestined to regard and not believe finds all believers too noisy and importunate: 
he rebuffs them. 
 
113 
 
`You want to make him interested in you? Then pretend to be embarrassed in his presence ‑' 
 
114 
 
The tremendous expectation in regard to sexual love and the shame involved in this expectation 
distorts all a woman's perspectives from the start. 
 
115 
 
Where neither love nor hate is in the game a woman is a mediocre player. 
 
116 
 
The great epochs of our life are the occasions when we gain the courage to rebaptize our evil 
qualities as our best qualities. 
 
117 
 
The will to overcome an emotion is ultimately only the will of another emotion or of several 
others. 
 
118 
 
There is an innocence in admiration: he has it to whom it has not yet occurred that he too could 
one day be admired. 
 
119 
 
Disgust with dirt can be so great that it prevents us from cleaning ourselves ‑ from `justifying' 
ourselves. 
 
120 
 
Sensuality often makes love grow too quickly, so that the root remains weak and is easy to pull 
out. 
 
121 
 
It was a piece of subtle refinement that God learned Greek when he wanted to become a writer‑ 
and that he did not learn it better. 
 
122 
 
To enjoy praise is with some people only politeness of the heart ‑ and precisely the opposite of 
vanity of the spirit. 
 
123 
 
Even concubinage has been corrupted: ‑ by marriage. 
 
124 
 
He who rejoices even at the stake triumphs not over pain but at the fact that he feels no pain 
where he had expected to feel it. A parable. 
 
125 
 
When we have to change our opinion about someone we hold the inconvenience he has therewith 
caused us greatly to his discredit. 
 
126 
 
A people is a detour of nature to get to six or seven great men. ‑ Yes: and then to get round them. 
 
127 
 
Science offends the modesty of all genuine women. They feel as if one were trying to look under 
their skin ‑ or worse! under their clothes and finery. 
 
128 
 
The more abstract the truth you want to teach the more you must seduce the senses to it. 
 
129 
 
The devil has the widest perspectives for God, and that is why he keeps so far away from him ‑ 
the devil being the oldest friend of knowledge. 
 
130 
 
What a person is begins to betray itself when his talent declines ‑ when he ceases to show what 
he can do. Talent is also finery; finery is also a hiding place. 
 
131 
 
The sexes deceive themselves about one another: the reason being that fundamentally they love 
and honour only themselves (or their own ideal, to express it more pleasantly‑). Thus man wants 
woman to be peaceful ‑ but woman is essentially unpeaceful, like the cat, however well she may 
have trained herself to present an appearance of peace. 
 
132 
 
One is punished most for one's virtues. 
 
133 
 
He who does not know how to find the road to his ideal lives more frivolously and impudently 
than the man without an ideal. 
 
134 
 
All credibility, all good conscience, all evidence of truth comes only from the senses. 
 
135 
 
Pharisaism is not degeneration in a good man: a good part of it is rather the condition of all being 
good. 
 
136 
 
One seeks a midwife for his thoughts, another someone to whom he can be a midwife: thus 
originates a good conversation. 
 
137 
 
When one has dealings with scholars and artists it is easy to miscalculate in opposite directions: 
behind a remarkable scholar one not infrequently finds a mediocre man, and behind a mediocre 
artist often ‑ a very remarkable man. 
 
138 
 
What we do in dreams we also do when we are awake: we invent and fabricate the person with 
whom we associate ‑ and immediately forget we have done so. 
 
139 
 
In revenge and in love woman is more barbarous than man. 
 
140 
 
Counsel as conundrum ‑ `If the bonds are not to burst ‑ you must try to cut them first.' 
 
141 
 
The belly is the reason man does not so easily take himself for a god. 
 
142 
 
The chastest expression I have ever heard: `Dans le véritable amour c'est l’âme, qui enveloppe le 
corps.' 
 
143 
 
Our vanity would have just that which we do best count as that which is hardest for us. The 
origin of many a morality: 
 
144 
 
When a woman has scholarly inclinations there is usually something wrong with her sexuality. 
Unfruitfulness itself disposes one to a certain masculinity of taste; for man is, if I may be allowed 
to say so, `the unfruitful animal'. 
 
145 
 
Comparing man and woman in general one may say: woman would not have the genius for 
finery if she did not have the instinct for the secondary role. 
 
146 
 
He who fights with monsters should look to it that he himself does not become a monster. And 
when you gaze long into an abyss the abyss also gazes into you. 
 
147 
 
From old Florentine novels, moreover ‑ from life: 'buona femmina a mala femmina vuol 
bastone'. Sacchetti, Nov. 86. 
 
148 
 
To seduce one's neighbour to a good opinion and afterwards faithfully to believe in this good 
opinion of one's neighbour: who can do this trick as well as women? 
 
149 
 
That which an age feels to be evil is usually an untimely after-echo of that which was formerly 
felt to be good ‑ the atavism of an older ideal. 
 
150 
 
Around the hero everything becomes a tragedy, around the demi‑god a satyr‑play; and around 
God everything becomes what? Perhaps a `world'? - 
 
151 
 
It is not enough to possess a talent: one must also possess your permission to possess it ‑ eh, my 
friends? 
 
152 
 
`Where the tree of knowledge stands is always Paradise': thus speak the oldest and youngest 
serpents. 
 
153 
 
That which is done out of love always takes place beyond good and evil. 
 
154 
 
Objection, evasion, happy distrust, pleasure in mockery are signs of health: everything 
unconditional belongs in pathology. 
 
155 
 
The sense of the tragic increases and diminishes with sensuality. 
 
156 
 
Madness is something rare in individuals ‑ but in groups, parties, peoples, ages it is the rule. 
 
157 
 
The thought of suicide is a powerful solace: by means of it one gets through many a bad night. 
 
158 
 
To our strongest drive, the tyrant in us, not only our reason but also our conscience submits. 
 
159 
 
One has to requite good and ill: but why to precisely the person who did us good or ill? 
 
160 
 
One no longer loves one's knowledge enough when one has communicated it. 
 
161 
 
Poets behave impudently towards their experiences: they exploit them. 
 
162 
 
‘Our neighbour is not our neighbour but our neighbour’s neighbour’ – thus thinks every people. 
 
163 
 
Love brings to light the exalted and concealed qualities of a lover ‑ what is rare and exceptional 
in him: to that extent it can easily deceive as to what is normal in him. 
 
164 
 
Jesus said to his Jews: `The law was made for servants ‑ love God as I love him, as his son! 
What have we sons of God to do with morality!' 
 
165 
 
Concerning every party ‑ A shepherd always has need of a bellwether ‑ or he must himself 
occasionally be one. 
 
166 
 
You may lie with your mouth, but with the mouth you make as you do so you none the less tell 
the truth. 
 
167 
 
With hard men intimacy is a thing of shame – and something precious. 
 
168 
 
Christianity gave Eros poison to drink ‑ he did not die of it, to be sure, but degenerated into vice. 
 
169 
 
to talk about oneself a great deal can also be a means of concealing oneself. 
 
170 
 
In praise there is more importunity than in blame. 
 
171 
 
Pity in a man of knowledge seems almost ludicrous, like sensitive hands on a Cyclops. 
 
172 
 
From love of man one sometimes embraces anyone (because one cannot embrace everyone): but 
one must never let this anyone know it. . . 
 
173 
 
One does not hate so long as one continues to rate low, but only when one has come to rate equal 
or higher. 
 
174 
 
You utilitarians, you too love everything useful only as a vehicle of your inclinations ‑ you too 
really find the noise of its wheels intolerable? 
 
175 
 
Ultimately one loves one's desires and not that which is desired. 
 
176 
 
The vanity of others offends our taste only when it offends our vanity. 
 
177 
 
Perhaps no one has ever been sufficiently truthful about what `truthfulness' is. 
 
178 
 
Clever people are not credited with their follies: what a deprivation of human rights! 
 
179 
 
The consequences of our actions take us by the scruff of the neck, altogether indifferent to the 
fact that we have `improved' in the meantime. 
 
180 
 
There is an innocence in lying which is the sign of good faith in a cause. 
 
181 
 
It is inhuman to bless where one is cursed. 
 
182 
 
The familiarity of the superior embitters, because it may not be returned. 
 
183 
 
`Not that you lied to me but that I no longer believe you - that is what has distressed me ‑.' 
 
184 
 
There is a wild spirit of good‑naturedness which looks like malice. 
 
185 
 
`I do not like it.' ‑ Why? ‑ `I am not up to it.' ‑ Has anyone ever answered like that? 
Beyond Good And Evil 
By: Friedrich Nietzsche 
 
Part Five : On the Natural History of Morals 
 
186 
 
Moral sensibility is as subtle, late, manifold, sensitive and refined in Europe today as the `science 
of morals' pertaining to it is still young, inept, clumsy and coarse‑fingered ‑ an interesting 
contrast which sometimes even becomes visible and incarnate in the person of a moralist. Even 
the expression `science of morals' is, considering what is designated by it, far too proud, and 
contrary to good taste: which is always accustomed to choose the more modest expressions. One 
should, in all strictness, admit what will be needful here for a long time to come, what alone is 
provisionally justified here: assembly of material, conceptual comprehension and arrangement of 
a vast domain of delicate value‑feelings and value-distinctions which live, grow, beget and 
perish ‑ and perhaps attempts to display the more frequent and recurring forms of these living 
crystallizations ‑ as preparation of a typology of morals. To be sure: one has not been so modest 
hitherto. Philosophers one and all have, with a strait‑laced seriousness that provokes laughter, 
demanded something much higher, more pretentious, more solemn of themselves as soon as they 
have concerned themselves with morality as a science: they wanted to furnish the rational ground 
of morality ‑ and every philosopher hitherto has believed he has furnished this rational ground of 
morality itself, however, was taken as 'given'. How far from their clumsy pride was that 
apparently insignificant task left in dust and mildew, the task of description, although the most 
delicate hands and senses could hardly be delicate enough for it! It was precisely because moral 
philosophers knew the facts of morality only somewhat vaguely in an arbitrary extract or as a 
chance abridgement, as morality of their environment, their class, their church, the spirit of their 
times, their climate and zone of the earth, for instance ‑ it was precisely because they were ill 
informed and not even very inquisitive about other peoples, ages and former times, that they did 
not so much as catch sight of the real problems of morality ‑ for these come into view only if we 
compare many moralities. Strange though it may sound, in all `science of morals' hitherto the 
problem of morality itself has been lacking: the suspicion was lacking that there was anything 
problematic here. What philosophers called `the rational ground of morality' and sought to 
furnish was, viewed in the proper light, only a scholarly form of faith in the prevailing morality, 
a new way of expressing it, and thus itself a fact within a certain morality, indeed even in the last 
resort a kind of denial that this morality ought to be conceived of as a problem ‑ and in any event 
the opposite of a testing, analysis, doubting and vivisection of this faith. Hear, for example, with 
what almost venerable innocence Schopenhauer still presented his task, and draw your own 
conclusions as to how scientific a `science' is whose greatest masters still talk like children and 
old women: ‑ 'The principle', he says (Fundamental Problems of Ethics), 
 
the fundamental proposition on whose content all philosophers of ethics are actually at one: 
neminem laede, immo omnes, quantum potes, juva ‑ is actually the proposition of which all the 
teachers of morals endeavour to furnish the rational ground ... the actual foundation of ethics 
which has been sought for centuries like the philosopher's stone. 
 
‑ The difficulty of furnishing the rational ground for the above‑quoted proposition may indeed 
be great ‑ as is well known, Schopenhauer too failed to do it ‑ ; and he who has ever been certain 
how insipidly false and sentimental this proposition is in a world whose essence is will to power 
may like to recall that Schopenhauer, although a pessimist, actually ‑ played the flute . . . Every 
day, after dinner: read his biographers on this subject. And by the way: a pessimist, a 
world‑denier and God‑denier, who comes to a halt before morality ‑ who affirms morality and 
plays the flute, affirms laede neminem morality: what? is that actually ‑ a pessimist? 
 
187 
 
Quite apart from the value of such assertions as `there exists in us a categorical imperative' one 
can still ask: what does such an assertion say of the man who asserts it? There are moralities 
which are intended to justify their authors before others; other moralities are intended to calm 
him and make him content with himself; with others he wants to crucify and humiliate himself; 
with others he wants to wreak vengeance, with others hide himself, with others transfigure 
himself and set himself on high; this morality serves to make its author forget, that to make him 
or something about him forgotten; many moralists would like to exercise power and their 
creative moods on mankind; others, Kant perhaps among them, give to understand with their 
morality: `what is worthy of respect in me is that I know how to obey ‑ and things ought to be no 
different with you!' ‑ in short, moralities too are only a sign-language of the emotions. 
 
188 
 
Every morality is, as opposed to laisser aller, a piece of tyranny against `nature', likewise against 
`reason': but that can be no objection to it unless one is in possession of some other morality 
which decrees that any kind of tyranny and unreason is impermissible. The essential and 
invaluable element in every morality is that it is a protracted constraint: to understand Stoicism 
or Port‑Royal or Puritanism one should recall the constraint under which every language has 
hitherto attained strength and freedom ‑ the metrical constraint, the tyranny of rhyme and 
rhythm. How much trouble the poets and orators of every nation have given themselves! ‑ not 
excluding a few present‑day prose writers in whose ear there dwells an inexorable conscience ‑ 
`for the sake of foolishness', as the utilitarian fools say, thinking they are clever ‑ `from 
subjection to arbitrary laws', as the anarchists say, feeling themselves `free', even free‑spirited. 
But the strange fact is that all there is or has been on earth of freedom, subtlety, boldness, dance 
and masterly certainty, whether in thinking itself, or in ruling, or in speaking and persuasion, in 
the arts as in morals, has evolved only by virtue of the `tyranny of such arbitrary laws'; and, in all 
seriousness, there is no small probability that precisely this is `nature' and `natural' ‑ and not that 
laisser aller! Every artist knows how far from the feeling of letting himself go his `natural' 
condition is, the free ordering, placing, disposing, forming in the moment of `inspiration' ‑ and 
how strictly and subtly he then obeys thousandfold laws which precisely on account of their 
severity and definiteness mock all formulation in concepts (even the firmest concept is by 
comparison something fluctuating, manifold, ambiguous ‑). The essential thing `in heaven and 
upon earth' seems, to say it again, to be a protracted obedience in one direction: from out of that 
there always emerges and has always emerged in the long run something for the sake of which it 
is worthwhile to live on earth, for example virtue, art, music, dance, reason, spirituality ‑ 
something transfiguring, refined, mad and divine. Protracted unfreedom of spirit, mistrustful 
constraint in the communicability of ideas, the discipline thinkers imposed on themselves to 
think within an ecclesiastical or courtly rule or under Aristotelian presuppositions, the protracted 
spiritual will to interpret all events according to a Christian scheme and to rediscover and justify 
the Christian God in every chance occurrence ‑ all these violent, arbitrary, severe, gruesome and 
antirational things have shown themselves to be the means by which the European spirit was 
disciplined in its strength, ruthless curiosity and subtle flexibility: though admittedly an 
irreplaceable quantity of force and spirit had at the same time to be suppressed, stifled and 
spoiled (for here as everywhere `nature' shows itself as it is, in all its prodigal and indifferent 
magnificence, which is noble though it outrage our feelings). That for thousands of years 
European thinkers thought only so as to prove something ‑ today, on the contrary, we suspect 
any thinker who `wants to prove something' ‑ that they always knew in advance that which was 
supposed to result from the most rigorous cogitation, as used to be the case with Asiatic 
astrology and is still the case with the innocuous Christian‑moral interpretation of the most 
intimate personal experiences `to the glory of God' and `for the salvation of the soul' ‑ this 
tyranny, this arbitrariness, this rigorous and grandiose stupidity has educated the spirit; it seems 
that slavery, in the cruder and in the more refined sense, is the indispensable means also for 
spiritual discipline and breeding. Regard any morality from this point of view: it is `nature' in it 
which teaches hatred of laisser aller, of too great freedom, and which implants the need for 
limited horizons and immediate tasks ‑ which teaches the narrowing of perspective, and thus in a 
certain sense stupidity, as a condition of life and growth. 'Thou shalt obey someone and for a 
long time: otherwise thou shalt perish and lose all respect for thyself'‑ this seems to me to be 
nature's imperative, which is, to be sure, neither `categorical' as old Kant demanded it should be 
(hence the 'otherwise'‑), nor addressed to the individual (what do individuals matter to nature!), 
but to peoples, races, ages, classes, and above all to the entire animal `man', to mankind. 
 
189 
 
The industrious races find leisure very hard to endure: it was a masterpiece of English instinct to 
make Sunday so extremely holy and boring that the English unconsciously long again for their 
week‑ and working‑days ‑ as a kind of cleverly devised and cleverly intercalated fast, such as is 
also to be seen very frequently in the ancient world (although, as one might expect in the case of 
southern peoples, not precisely in regard to work ‑). There have to be fasts of many kinds; and 
wherever powerful drives and habits prevail legislators have to see to it that there are intercalary 
days on which such a drive is put in chains and learns to hunger again. Seen from a higher 
viewpoint, entire generations and ages, if they are infected with some moral fanaticism or other, 
appear to be such intercalated periods of constraint and fasting, during which a drive learns to 
stoop and submit, but also to purify and intensify itself; certain philosophical sects (for example 
the Stoa in the midst of the Hellenistic culture, with its air grown rank and overcharged with 
aphrodisiac vapours) likewise permit of a similar interpretation. ‑  This also provides a hint 
towards the elucidation of that paradox why it was precisely during Europe's Christian period 
and only under the impress of Christian value judgements that the sexual drive sublimated itself 
into love (amour passion). 
 
190 
 
There is something in Plato's morality which does not really belong to Plato but is only to be met 
with in his philosophy, one might say in spite of Plato: namely Socratism, for which he was 
really too noble. `No one wants to do injury to himself, therefore all badness is involuntary. For 
the bad man does injury to himself: this he would not do if he knew that badness is bad. Thus the 
bad man is bad only in consequence of an error; if one cures him of his error, one necessarily 
makes him ‑ good.' ‑ This way of reasoning smells of the mob, which sees in bad behaviour only 
its disagreeable consequences and actually judges `it is stupid to act badly'; while it takes `good' 
without further ado to be identical with `useful and pleasant'. In the case of every utilitarian 
morality one may conjecture in advance a similar origin and follow one's nose: one will seldom 
go astray. ‑ Plato did all he could to interpret something refined and noble into his teacher's 
proposition, above all himself ‑ he, the most intrepid of interpreters, who picked up the whole of 
Socrates only in the manner of a popular tune from the streets, so as to subject it to infinite and 
impossible variations: that is, to make it into all his own masks and multiplicities. One might ask 
in jest, and in Homeric jest at that: what is the Platonic Socrates if not prosthe Platõn opithen to 
Platõn messē te chimaira? 
 
191 
 
The old theological problem of `faith' and `knowledge' ‑ or, more clearly, of instinct and reason 
‑ that is to say, the question whether in regard to the evaluation of things instinct deserves to 
have more authority than rationality, which wants to evaluate and act according to reasons, 
according to a `why?', that is to say according to utility and fitness for a purpose ‑ this is still that 
old moral problem which first appeared in the person of Socrates and was already dividing the 
minds of men long before Christianity. Socrates himself, to be sure, had, with the taste 
appropriate to his talent ‑ that of a superior dialectician ‑ initially taken the side of reason; and 
what indeed did he do all his life long but laugh at the clumsy incapacity of his noble Athenians, 
who were men of instinct, like all noble men, and were never able to supply adequate 
information about the reasons for their actions? Ultimately, however, in silence and secrecy, he 
laughed at himself too: he found in himself, before his more refined conscience and 
self‑interrogation, the same difficulty and incapacity. But why, he exhorted himself, should one 
therefore abandon the instincts! One must help both them and reason to receive their due one 
must follow the instincts, but persuade reason to aid them with good arguments. This was the 
actual falsity of that great ironist, who had so many secrets; he induced his conscience to 
acquiesce in a sort of self‑outwitting: fundamentally he had seen through the irrational aspect of 
moral judgement. ‑ Plato, more innocent in such things and without the craftiness of the 
plebeian, wanted at the expenditure of all his strength ‑ the greatest strength any philosopher has 
hitherto had to expend! ‑ to prove to himself that reason and instinct move of themselves 
towards one goal, towards the good, towards `God'; and since Plato all theologians and 
philosophers have followed the same path ‑ that is to say, in moral matters instinct, or as the 
Christians call it `faith', or as I call it `the herd', has hitherto triumphed. One might have to 
exclude Descartes, the father of rationalism (and consequently the grandfather of the 
Revolution), who recognized only the authority of reason: but reason is only an instrument, and 
Descartes was superficial. 
 
192 
 
He who has followed the history of an individual science will find in its evolution a clue to the 
comprehension of the oldest and most common processes of all `knowledge and understanding': 
in both cases it is the premature hypotheses, the fictions, the good stupid will to `believe', the 
lack of mistrust and patience which are evolved first ‑ it is only late, and then imperfectly, that 
our senses learn to be subtle, faithful, cautious organs of understanding. It is more comfortable 
for our eye to react to a particular object by producing again an image it has often produced 
before than by retaining what is new and different in an impression: the latter requires more 
strength, more `morality'. To hear something new is hard and painful for the ear; we hear the 
music of foreigners badly. When we hear a foreign language we involuntarily attempt to form the 
sounds we hear into words which have a more familiar and homely ring: thus the Germans, for 
example, once heard arcubalista and adapted it into Armbrust. The novel finds our senses, too, 
hostile and reluctant; and even in the case of the `simplest' processes of the senses, the emotions, 
such as fear, love, hatred, and the passive emotions of laziness, dominate. -  As little as a reader 
today reads all the individual words (not to speak of the syllables) of a page ‑ he rather takes 
about five words in twenty haphazardly and `conjectures' their probable meaning ‑ just as little 
do we see a tree exactly and entire with regard to its leaves, branches, colour, shape; it is so 
much easier for us to put together an approximation of a tree. Even when we are involved in the 
most uncommon experiences we still do the same thing: we fabricate the greater pan of the 
experience and can hardly be compelled not to contemplate some event as its `inventor'. All this 
means: we are from the very heart and from the very first ‑ accustomed to lying. Or, to express it 
more virtuously and hypocritically, in short more pleasantly: one is much more of an artist than 
one realizes. In a lively conversation I often see before me the face of the person with whom I 
am speaking so clearly and subtly determined by the thought he is expressing or which I believe 
has been called up in him that this degree of clarity far surpasses the power of my eyesight ‑ so 
that the play of the muscles and the expression of the eyes must have been invented by me. 
Probably the person was making a quite different face or none whatever. 
 
193 
 
Quidquid luce fuit, tenebris agit: but also the other way round. That which we experience in 
dreams, if we experience it often, is in the end just as much a part of the total economy of our 
soul as is anything we `really' experience: we are by virtue of it richer or poorer, feel one need 
more or one need fewer, and finally are led along a little in broad daylight and even in the most 
cheerful moments of our waking spirit by the habits of our dreams. Suppose someone has often 
flown in his dreams and finally as soon as he starts dreaming becomes conscious of a power and 
art of flying as if it were a privilege he possessed, likewise as his personal and enviable form of 
happiness: such a man as believes he can realize any arc and angle with the slightest impulse, as 
knows the feeling of a certain divine frivolity, a `going up' without tension or constraint, a `going 
down' without condescension or abasement - without gravity! ‑ how should the man who knew 
such dream-experiences and dream‑habits not find at last that the word `happiness' had a 
different colour and definition in his waking hours too! How should he not have a different kind 
of ‑ desire for happiness? `Soaring rapture' as the poets describe it must seem to him, in 
comparison with this `flying', too earthy, muscular, violent, too `grave'. 
 
194 
 
The diversity of men is revealed not only in the diversity of their tables of what they find good, 
that is to say in the fact that they regard diverse goods worth striving for and also differ as to 
what is more or less valuable, as to the order of rank of the goods they all recognize ‑ it is 
revealed even more in what they regard as actually having and possessing what they find good. 
In regard to a woman, for example, the more modest man.counts the simple disposal of her body 
and sexual gratification as a sufficient and satisfactory sign of having, of possession; another, 
with a more jealous and demanding thirst for possession, sees the `question‑mark', the merely 
apparent quality of such a having and requires subtler tests, above all in order to know whether 
the woman not only gives herself to him but also gives up for his sake what she has or would like 
to have ‑ : only thus does she count to him as `possessed'. A third, however, is not done with 
jealousy and desire for having even then; he asks himself whether, when the woman gives up 
everything for him, she does not perhaps do so for a phantom of him: he demands that she know 
him to the very heart before she is able to love him at all, he dares to let himself be unravelled ‑ . 
He feels that his beloved is fully in his possession only when she no longer deceives herself 
about him but loves him as much for his devilry and hidden insatiability as she does for his 
goodness, patience and spirituality. One would like to possess a people: and all the higher arts of 
a Cagliostro and Catiline seem to him right for that end. Another, with a more refined thirst for 
possession, says to himself‑ `one may not deceive where one wants to possess' ‑ he is irritated 
and dissatisfied at the idea that it is a mask of him which rules the hearts of the people: 'so I must 
let myself be known and, first of all, know myself!' Among helpful and charitable people one 
almost always finds that clumsy deceitfulness which first adjusts and adapts him who is to be 
helped: as if, for example, he `deserved' help, desired precisely their help, and would prove 
profoundly grateful, faithful and submissive to them in return for all the help he had received 
with these imaginings they dispose of those in need as if they were possessions, and are 
charitable and helpful at all only from a desire for possessions. They are jealous if one frustrates 
or anticipates them when they want to help. Parents involuntarily make of their child something 
similar to themselves they call it `education' ‑ and at the bottom of her heart no mother doubts 
that in her child she has borne a piece of property, no father disputes his right to subject it to his 
concepts and values. Indeed, in former times (among the ancient Germans, for instance) it 
seemed proper for fathers to possess power of life or death over the newborn and to use it as they 
thought fit. And as formerly the father, so still today the teacher, the class, the priest, the prince 
unhesitatingly see in every new human being an opportunity for a new possession. From which it 
follows . . . 
 
195 
 
The Jews ‑ a people `born for slavery' as Tacitus and the whole ancient world says, `the chosen 
people' as they themselves say and believe ‑ the Jews achieved that miracle of inversion of 
values thanks to which life on earth has for a couple of millennia acquired a new and dangerous 
fascination ‑ their prophets fused `rich', `godless', `evil', `violent', `sensual' into one and were the 
first to coin the word `world' as a term of infamy. It is in this inversion of values (with which is 
involved the employment of the word for `poor' as a synonym of `holy' and `friend') that the 
significance of the Jewish people resides: with them there begins the slave revolt in morals. 
 
196 
 
It is to be inferred that there exist countless dark bodies close to the sun ‑ such as we shall never 
see. This is, between ourselves, a parable; and a moral psychologist reads the whole starry script 
only as a parable and sign‑language by means of which many things can be kept secret. 
 
197 
 
One altogether misunderstands the beast of prey and man of prey (Cesare Borgia for example), 
one misunderstands `nature', so long as one looks for something `sick' at the bottom of these 
healthiest of all tropical monsters and growths, or even for an inborn `hell' in them‑: as virtually 
all moralists have done hitherto. It seems, does it not, that there exists in moralists a hatred for 
the jungle and the tropics? And that the `tropical man' has to be discredited at any cost, whether 
as the sickness and degeneration of man or as his own hell and self-torment? But why? For the 
benefit of `temperate zones'? The benefit of temperate men? Of the `moral'? Of the mediocre? 
This for the chapter `Morality as Timidity'. 
 
198 
 
All these moralities which address themselves to the individual person, for the promotion of his 
`happiness' as they say what are they but prescriptions for behaviour in relation to the degree of 
perilousness in which the individual person lives with himself; recipes to counter his passions, 
his good and bad inclinations in so far as they have will to power in them and would like to play 
the tyrant; great and little artifices and acts of prudence to which there clings the 
nook‑and‑cranny odour of ancient household remedies and old‑woman wisdom; one and all 
baroque and unreasonable in form ‑ because they address themselves to `all', because they 
generalize where generalization is impermissible ‑ speaking unconditionally one and all, taking 
themselves for unconditional, flavoured with more than one grain of salt, indeed tolerable only, 
and occasionally even tempting, when they learn to smell overspiced and dangerous, to smell 
above all of `the other world': all this is, from an intellectual point of view, of little value and far 
from constituting `science', not to speak of `wisdom', but rather, to say it again and to say it 
thrice, prudence, prudence, prudence, mingled with stupidity, stupidity, stupidity ‑ whether it be 
that indifference and statuesque coldness towards the passionate folly of the emotions which the 
Stoics advised and applied; or that no‑more‑laughing and no‑more‑weeping of Spinoza, that 
destruction of the emotions through analysis and vivisection which he advocated so naively; or 
that depression of the emotions to a harmless mean at which they may be satisfied, the 
Aristotelianism of morals; even morality as enjoyment of the emotions in a deliberate thinning 
down and spiritualization through the symbolism of art, as music for instance, or as love of God 
or love of man for the sake of God ‑ for in religion the passions again acquire civic rights, 
assuming that . . .; finally, even that easygoing and roguish surrender to the emotions such as 
Hafiz and Goethe taught, that bold letting fall of the reins, that spiritual‑physical licentia morum 
in the exceptional case of wise old owls and drunkards for whom there is `no longer much risk in 
it'. This too for the chapter `Morality as Timidity'. 
 
199 
 
Inasmuch as ever since there have been human beings there have also been human herds (family 
groups, communities, tribes, nations, states, churches), and always very many who obey 
compared with the very small number of those who command ‑ considering, that is to say, that 
hitherto nothing has been practised and cultivated among men better or longer than obedience, it 
is fair to suppose that as a rule a need for it is by now innate as a kind of formal conscience 
which commands: 'thou shaft unconditionally do this, unconditionally not do that', in short 'thou 
shaft'. This need seeks to be satisfied and to fill out its form with a content; in doing so it grasps 
about wildly, according to the degree of its strength, impatience and tension, with little 
discrimination, as a crude appetite, and accepts whatever any commander ‑ parent, teacher, law, 
class prejudice, public opinion ‑ shouts in its ears. The strange narrowness of human evolution, 
its hesitations, its delays, its frequent retrogressions and rotations, are due to the fact that the herd 
instinct of obedience has been inherited best and at the expense of the art of commanding. If we 
think of this instinct taken to its ultimate extravagance there would be no commanders or 
independent men at all; or, if they existed, they would suffer from a bad conscience and in order 
to be able to command would have to practise a deceit upon themselves: the deceit, that is, that 
they too were only obeying. This state of things actually exists in Europe today: I call it the 
moral hypocrisy of the commanders. They know no way of defending themselves against their 
bad conscience other than to pose as executors of more ancient or higher commands (commands 
of ancestors, of the constitution, of justice, of the law or even of God), or even to borrow herd 
maxims from the herd's way of thinking and appear as `the first servant of the people' for 
example, or as `instruments of the common good'. On the other hand, the herd‑man in Europe 
today makes himself out to be the only permissible kind of man and glorifies the qualities 
through which he is tame, peaceable and useful to the herd as the real human virtues: namely 
public spirit, benevolence, consideration, industriousness, moderation, modesty, forbearance, 
pity. In those cases, however, in which leaders and bell‑wethers are thought to be indispensable, 
there is attempt after attempt to substitute for them an adding‑together of clever herd‑men: this, 
for example, is the origin of all parliamentary constitutions. All this notwithstanding, what a 
blessing, what a release from a burden becoming intolerable, the appearance of an unconditional 
commander is for this herd‑animal European, the effect produced by the appearance of Napoleon 
is the latest great witness ‑ the history of the effect of Napoleon is almost the history of the 
higher happiness this entire century has attained in its most valuable men and moments. 
 
200 
 
The man of an era of dissolution which mixes the races together and who therefore contains 
within him the inheritance of a diversified descent, that is to say contrary and often not merely 
contrary drives and values which struggle with one another and rarely leave one another in peace 
‑ such a man of late cultures and broken lights will, on average, be a rather weak man: his 
fundamental desire is that the war which he is should come to an end; happiness appears to him, 
in accord with a sedative (for example Epicurean or Christian) medicine and mode of thought, 
pre‑eminently as the happiness of repose, of tranquillity, of satiety, of unity at last attained, as a 
`Sabbath of Sabbaths', to quote the holy rhetorician Augustine, who was himself such a man. ‑ 
If, however, the contrariety and war in such a nature should act as one more stimulus and 
enticement to life ‑ and if, on the other hand, in addition to powerful and irreconcilable drives, 
there has also been inherited and cultivated a proper mastery and subtlety in conducting a war 
against oneself, that is to say self‑control, self‑outwitting: then there arise those marvellously in-
comprehensible and unfathomable men, those enigmatic men predestined for victory and the 
seduction of others, the fairest examples of which are Alcibiades and Caesar (‑ to whom I should 
like to add that first European agreeable to my taste, the Hohenstaufen Friedrich II), and among 
artists perhaps Leonardo da Vinci. They appear in precisely the same ages as those in which that 
rather weak type with his desire for rest comes to the fore: the two types belong together and 
originate in the same causes. 
 
201 
 
So long as the utility which dominates moral value‑judgements is solely that which is useful to 
the herd, so long as the object is solely the preservation of the community and the immoral is 
sought precisely and exclusively in that which seems to imperil the existence of the community: 
so long as that is the case there can be no `morality of love of one's neighbour'. Supposing that 
even there a constant little exercise of consideration, pity, fairness, mildness, mutual aid was 
practised, supposing that even at that stage of society all those drives are active which are later 
honourably designated `virtues' and are finally practically equated with the concept `morality': in 
that era they do not yet by any means belong to the domain of moral valuations ‑ they are still 
extra‑moral. An act of pity, for example, was during the finest age of Rome considered neither 
good nor bad, neither moral nor immoral; and even if it was commended, this commendation 
was entirely compatible with a kind of involuntary disdain, as soon, that is, as it was set beside 
any action which served the welfare of the whole, of the res publica. Ultimately `love of one's 
neighbour' is always something secondary, in part conventional and arbitrarily illusory, when 
compared with fear of one's neighbour Once the structure of society seems to have been in 
general fixed and made safe from external dangers, it is this fear of one's neighbour which again 
creates new perspectives of moral valuation. There are certain strong and dangerous drives, such 
as enterprisingness, foolhardiness, revengefulness, craft, rapacity, ambition, which hitherto had 
not only to be honoured from the point of view of their social utility ‑ under different names, 
naturally, from those chosen here ‑ but also mightily developed and cultivated (because they 
were constantly needed to protect the community as a whole against the enemies of the 
community as a whole); these drives are now felt to be doubly dangerous ‑ now that the 
diversionary outlets for them are lacking ‑ and are gradually branded as immoral and given over 
to calumny. The antithetical drives and inclinations now come into moral honour; step by step 
the herd instinct draws its conclusions. How much or how little that is dangerous to the 
community, dangerous to equality, resides in an opinion, in a condition or emotion, in a will, in a 
talent, that is now the moral perspective: here again fear is the mother of morality. When the 
highest and strongest drives, breaking passionately out, carry the individual far above and 
beyond the average and lowlands of the herd conscience, the self‑confidence of the community 
goes to pieces, its faith in itself, its spine as it were, is broken: consequently it is precisely these 
drives which are most branded and calumniated. Lofty spiritual independence, the will to stand 
alone, great intelligence even, are felt to be dangerous; everything that raises the individual 
above the herd and makes his neighbour quail is henceforth called evil; the fair, modest, 
obedient, self‑effacing disposition, the mean and average in desires, acquires moral names and 
honours. Eventually, under very peaceful conditions, there is less and less occasion or need to 
educate one's feelings in severity and sternness; and now every kind of severity, even severity in 
justice, begins to trouble the conscience; a stern and lofty nobility and self‑responsibility is 
received almost as an offence and awakens mistrust, `the lamb', even more `the sheep', is held in 
higher and higher respect. There comes a point of morbid mellowing and over‑tenderness in the 
history of society at which it takes the side even of him who harms it, the criminal, and does so 
honestly and wholeheartedly. Punishment: that seems to it somehow unfair ‑ certainly the idea of 
`being punished' and `having to punish' is unpleasant to it, makes it afraid. `Is it not enough to 
render him harmless? why punish him as well? To administer punishment is itself dreadful!' with 
this question herd morality, the morality of timidity, draws its ultimate conclusion. Supposing all 
danger, the cause of fear, could be abolished, this morality would therewith also be abolished: it 
would no longer be necessary, it would no longer regard itself as necessary! ‑ He who examines 
the conscience of the present‑day European will have to extract from a thousand moral recesses 
and hiding‑places always the, same imperative, the imperative of herd timidity: `we wish hat 
there will one day no longer be anything to fear!' One day everywhere in Europe the will and 
way to that day is now called `progress'. 
 
202 
 
Let us straight away say once more what we have already said a hundred times: for ears today 
offer such truths ‑ our truths no ready welcome. We know well enough how offensive it sounds 
when someone says plainly and without metaphor that man is an animal; but it will be reckoned 
almost a crime in us that precisely in regard to men of `modern ideas' we constantly employ the 
terms `herd', `herd instinct', and the like. But what of that! we can do no other: for it is precisely 
here that our new insight lies. We have found that in all principal moral judgements Europe has 
become unanimous, including the lands where Europe's influence predominates: one manifestly 
knows in Europe what Socrates thought he did not know, and what that celebrated old serpent 
once promised to teach ‑ one `knows' today what is good and evil. Now it is bound to make a 
harsh sound and one not easy for ears to hear when we insist again and again: that which here 
believes it knows, that which here glorifies itself with its praising and blaming and calls itself 
good, is the instinct of the herd‑animal man: the instinct which has broken through and come to 
predominate and prevail over the other instincts and is coming to do so more and more in 
proportion to the increasing physiological approximation and assimilation of which it is the 
symptom. Morality is in Europe today herd‑animal morality ‑ that is to say, as we understand 
the thing, only one kind of human morality beside which, before which, after which many other, 
above all higher, moralities are possible or ought to be possible. But against such a `possibility', 
against such an `ought', this morality defends itself with all its might: it says, obstinately and 
stubbornly, `I am morality itself, and nothing is morality besides me!' ‑ indeed, with the aid of a 
religion which has gratified and flattered the sublimest herd‑animal desires, it has got to the 
point where we discover even in political and social institutions an increasingly evident 
expression of this morality: the democratic movement inherits the Christian. But that the tempo 
of this movement is much too slow and somnolent for the more impatient, for the sick and 
suffering of the said instinct, is attested by the ever more frantic baying, the ever more 
undisguised fang‑baring of the anarchist dogs which now rove the streets of European culture: 
apparently the reverse of the placidly industrious democrats and revolutionary ideologists, and 
even more so of the stupid philosophasters and brotherhood fanatics who call themselves 
socialists and want a `free society', they are in fact at one with them all in their total and 
instinctive hostility towards every form of society other than that of the autonomous herd (to the 
point of repudiating even the concepts `master' and `servant' ‑ ni dieu ni maître says a socialist 
formula ‑ ); at one in their tenacious opposition to every special claim, every special right and 
privilege (that is to say, in the last resort to every right: for when everyone is equal no one will 
need any `rights' ‑ ); at one in their mistrust of punitive justice (as if it were an assault on the 
weaker, an injustice against the necessary consequence of all previous society ‑ ); but equally at 
one in the religion of pity, in sympathy with whatever feels, lives, suffers (down as far as the 
animals, up as far, as `God' ‑ the extravagance of `pity for God' belongs in a democratic era ‑ ); 
at one, one and all, in the cry and impatience of pity, in mortal hatred for suffering in general, in 
their almost feminine incapacity to remain spectators of suffering, to let suffer; at one in their 
involuntary gloom and sensitivity, under whose spell Europe seems threatened with a new 
Buddhism; at one in their faith in the morality of mutual pity, as if it were morality in itself and 
the pinnacle, the attained pinnacle of man, the sole hope of the future, the consolation of the 
present and the great redemption from all the guilt of the past ‑ at one, one and all, in their faith 
in the community as the saviour, that is to say in the herd, in `themselves' . . . 
 
203 
 
We, who have a different faith ‑ we, to whom the democratic movement is not merely a form 
assumed by political organization in decay but also a form assumed by man in decay, that is to 
say in diminishment, in process of becoming mediocre and losing his value: whither must the 
direct our hopes? ‑ Towards new philosophers, we have no other choice; towards spirits strong 
and original enough to make a start on antithetical evaluations and to revalue and reverse `eternal 
values'; towards heralds and forerunners, towards men of the future who in the present knot 
together the constraint which compels the will of millennia on to new paths. To teach man the 
future of man as his will, as dependent on a human will, and to prepare for great enterprises and 
collective experiments in discipline and breeding so as to make an end of that gruesome 
dominion of chance and nonsense that has hitherto been called `history' ‑ the nonsense of the 
`greatest number' is only its latest form for that a new kind of philosopher and commander will 
some time be needed, in face of whom whatever has existed on earth of hidden, dreadful and 
benevolent spirits may well look pale and dwarfed. It is the image of such leaders which hovers 
before our eyes ‑ may I say that aloud, you free spirits? 
 
The circumstances one would have in part to create, in part to employ, to bring them into 
existence; the conjectural paths and tests by virtue of which a soul could grow to such height and 
power it would feel compelled to these tasks; a revaluation of values under whose novel pressure 
and hammer a conscience would be steeled, a heart transformed to brass, so that it might endure 
the weight of such a responsibility; on the other hand, the need for such leaders, the terrible 
danger they might not appear or might fail or might degenerate ‑ these are our proper cares and 
concerns, do you know that, you free spirits? These are the heavy, remote thoughts and thunder 
clouds that pass across our life's sky. There are few more grievous pains than once to have 
beheld, divined, sensed, how an extraordinary man missed his way and degenerated: but he who 
has the rare eye for the collective danger that `man' himself may degenerate, he who, like us, has 
recognized the tremendous fortuitousness which has hitherto played its game with the future of 
man ‑ a game in which no hand, not even a `finger of God' took any part! ‑ he who has divined 
the fatality that lies concealed in the idiotic guilelessness and blind confidence of `modern ideas', 
even more in the whole of Christian‑European morality: he suffers from a feeling of anxiety 
with which no other can be compared ‑ for he comprehends in a single glance all that which, 
given a favourable accumulation and intensification of forces and tasks, could be cultivated out 
of man, he knows with all the knowledge of his conscience how the greatest possibilities in man 
are still unexhausted and how often before the type man has been faced with strange decisions 
and new paths ‑ he knows even better from his most painful memories against what wretched 
things an evolving being of the highest rank has hitherto usually been shattered and has broken 
off, sunk and has itself become wretched. The collective degeneration of man down to that which 
the socialist dolts and blockheads today see as their `man of the future' ‑ as their ideal! ‑ this 
degeneration and diminution of man to the perfect herd animal (or, as they say, to the man of the 
`free society'), this animalization of man to the pygmy animal of equal rights and equal 
pretensions is possible, there is no doubt about that! He who has once thought this possibility 
through to the end knows one more kind of disgust than other men do ‑ and perhaps also a new 
task! . . . 
Beyond Good And Evil 
By: Friedrich Nietzsche 
 
Part Six: We Scholars 
 
204 
 
At the risk that moralizing will here too prove to be what it has always been ‑ namely an 
undismayed montrer ses plaies, as Balzac says ‑ I should like to venture to combat a harmful and 
improper displacement of the order of rank between science and philosophy which is today, quite 
unnoticed and as if with a perfect good conscience, threatening to become established. In my 
view it is only' from one's experience experience always means bad experience, does it not? ‑ 
that one can acquire the right to speak on such a higher question of rank: otherwise one will talk 
like a blind man about colours or like women and artists against science (`oh this wicked 
science', their modesty and instinct sighs, `it always exposes the facts!'‑). The Declaration of 
Independence of the man of science, his emancipation from philosophy, is one of the more subtle 
after‑effects of the democratic form and formlessness of life: the self‑glorification and 
presumption of the scholar now stands everywhere in full bloom and in its finest springtime ‑ 
which does not mean to say that in this case self‑praise smells sweetly. `Away with all masters!' 
‑ that is what the plebeian instinct desires here too; and now that science has most successfully 
resisted theology, whose `hand maid' it was for too long, it is now, with great high spirits and a 
plentiful lack of understanding, taking it upon itself to lay down laws for philosophy and for 
once to play the `master' ‑ what am I saying? to play the philosopher itself. My memory ‑ the 
memory of a man of science, if I may say so! is full of arrogant naiveties I have heard about 
philosophy and philosophers from young scientists and old physicians (not to speak of the most 
cultured and conceited of all scholars, the philologists and schoolmen, who are both by 
profession ‑). Now it was the specialist and jobbing workman who instinctively opposed 
synthetic undertakings and capacities in general; now the industrious labourer who had got a 
scent of the otium and noble luxury in the philosopher's physical economy and felt wronged and 
diminished by it. Now it was that colour blindness of the utility man who sees in philosophy 
nothing but a series of refuted systems and a wasteful expenditure which `benefits' nobody. Now 
a fear of disguised mysticism and a rectification of the frontiers of knowledge leaped out; now a 
disrespect for an individual philosopher which had involuntarily generalized itself into a 
disrespect for philosophy. Finally, what I found most frequently among young scholars was that 
behind the arrogant disdain for philosophy there lay the evil after‑effect of a philosopher 
himself, from whom they had, to be sure, withdrawn their allegiance, without, however, having 
got free from the spell of his disparaging evaluation of other philosophers ‑ the result being a 
feeling of ill humour towards philosophy in general. (This is the sort of after‑effect which, it 
seems to me, Schopenhauer, for example, has had on Germany in recent years ‑ with his 
unintelligent rage against Hegel he succeeded in disconnecting the entire last generation of 
Germans from German culture, which culture was, all things considered, a high point and 
divinatory refinement of the historical sense: but Schopenhauer himself was in precisely this 
respect poor, unreceptive and un‑German to the point of genius.) In general and broadly 
speaking, it may have been above all the human, all too human element, in short the poverty of 
the most recent philosophy itself, which has been most thoroughly prejudicial to respect for 
philosophy and has opened the gates to the instinct of the plebeian. For one must admit how 
completely the whole species of a Heraclitus, a Plato, an Empedocles, and whatever else these 
royal and splendid hermits of the spirit were called, is lacking in our modern world; and to what 
degree, in face of such representatives of philosophy as are, thanks to fashion, at present as 
completely on top as they are completely abysmal (in Germany, for example, the two lions of 
Berlin, the anarchist Eugen Dühring and the amalgamist Eduard von Hartmann) a worthy man of 
science is justified in feeling he is of a better species and descent. It is, in particular, the sight of 
those hotchpotch‑philosophers who call themselves `philosophers of reality' or `positivists' 
which is capable of implanting a perilous mistrust in the soul of an ambitious young scholar: 
these gentlemen are at best scholars and specialists themselves, that fact is palpable! ‑ they are 
one and all defeated men brought back under the sway of science, who at some time or other 
demanded more of themselves without having the right to this `more' and the responsibility that 
goes with it ‑ and who now honourably, wrathfully, revengefully represent by word and deed the 
unbelief in the lordly task and lordliness of philosophy. Finally: how could things be otherwise! 
Science is flourishing today and its good conscience shines in its face, while that to which the 
whole of modern philosophy has gradually sunk, this remnant of philosophy, arouses distrust and 
displeasure when it does not arouse mockery and pity. Philosophy reduced to `theory of 
knowledge', actually no more than a timid epochism and abstinence doctrine: a philosophy that 
does not even get over the threshold and painfully denier itself the right of entry ‑ that is 
philosophy at its last gasp, an end, an agony, something that arouses pity. How could such a 
philosophy rule! 
 
205 
 
The perils in the way of the evolution of the philosopher are in truth so manifold today one may 
well doubt whether this fruit can still ripen at all. The compass and tower‑building of the 
sciences has grown enormous, and therewith the probability has also grown enormous that the 
philosopher will become weary while still no more than a learner, or that he will let himself be 
stopped somewhere and `specialize': so that he will never reach his proper height, the height 
from which he can survey, look around and look down. Or that he will reach this height too late, 
when his best time is past and his best strength spent; or damaged, coarsened, degenerate, so that 
his view, his total value judgement, no longer means much. Perhaps it is the very refinement of 
his intellectual conscience which makes him linger on the way and arrive late; he fears he may 
be seduced into dilettantism, into becoming an insect with a thousand feet and a thousand 
antennae, he knows too well that one who has lost respect for himself can no longer command, 
can no longer lead as a man of knowledge either, unless he wants to become a great actor, a 
philosophical Cagliostro and pied piper of the spirit, in short a mis‑leader. This is ultimately a 
question of taste even if it were not a question of conscience. In addition to this, so as to redouble 
his difficulties, there is the fact that the philosopher demands of himself a judgement, a Yes or 
No, not in regard to the sciences but in regard to life and the value of life ‑ that he is reluctant to 
believe he has a right, to say nothing of a duty, to come to such a judgement, and has to find his 
way to this right and this faith only through the widest‑perhaps most disturbing and shattering ‑ 
experiences, and often hesitating, doubting, and being struck dumb. Indeed, the mob has long 
confounded and confused the philosopher with someone else, whether with the man of science or 
with the religiously exalted, dead to the senses, `dead to the world' fanatic and drunkard of God; 
and today if one hears anyone commended for living `wisely' or `like a philosopher', it means 
hardly more than `prudently and apart'. Wisdom: that seems to the rabble to be a kind of flight, 
an artifice and means for getting oneself out of a dangerous game; but the genuine philosopher ‑ 
as he seems to ms, my friends? ‑ lives `unphilosophically' and `unwisely', above all imprudently, 
and bears the burden and duty of a hundred attempts and temptations of life ‑ he risks himself 
constantly, he plays the dangerous game . . . 
 
206 
 
In comparison with a genius, that is to say with a being which either begets or bears, both words 
taken in their most comprehensive sense ‑ the scholar, the average man of science, always has 
something of the old maid about him: for, like her, he has no acquaintanceship with the two most 
valuable functions of mankind. To both of them, indeed, to the scholar and to the old maid, one 
concedes respectability, by way of compensation as it were ‑ one emphasizes the respectability 
in these cases ‑ and experiences the same feeling of annoyance at having been constrained to this 
concession. Let us look more closely: what is the man of science? An ignoble species of man for 
a start, with the virtues of an ignoble, that is to say subservient, unauthoritative and 
un‑self‑sufficient species of man: he possesses industriousness, patient acknowledgement of his 
proper place in the rank and file, uniformity and moderation in abilities and requirements, he 
possesses the instinct for his own kind and for that which his own kind have need of, for example 
that little bit of independence and green pasture without which there is no quiet work, that claim 
to honour and recognition (which first and foremost presupposes recognizability ‑), that sunshine 
of a good name, that constant affirmation of his value and his utility with which his inner 
distrust, the dregs at the heart of all dependent men and herd animals, have again and again to be 
overcome. The scholar also possesses, as is only to be expected, the diseases and ill breeding of 
an ignoble species: he is full of petty envy and has very keen eyes for what is base in those 
natures to whose heights he is unable to rise. He is trusting, but only like one who sometimes lets 
himself go but never lets himself flow out‑, and it is precisely in the presence of men who do 
flow out that he becomes the more frosty and reserved ‑ his eye is then like a reluctant smooth 
lake whose surface is disturbed by no ripple of delight or sympathy. The worst and most 
dangerous thing of which a scholar is capable comes from the instinct of mediocrity which 
characterizes his species: from that jesuitism of mediocrity which instinctively works for the 
destruction of the uncommon man and tries to break or ‑ better still! ‑ relax every bent bow. For 
relaxing with consideration, with indulgent hand, naturally, relaxing with importunate pity: that 
is the true art of jesuitism, which has always understood how to introduce itself as the religion of 
pity. 
 
207 
 
However gratefully one may go to welcome an objective spirit ‑ and who has not been sick to 
death of everything subjective and its accursed ipsissimosity! ‑ in the end one has to learn to be 
cautious with one's gratitude too and put a stop to the exaggerated way in which the 
depersonalization of the spirit is today celebrated as redemption and transfiguration, as if it were 
the end in itself: as is usually the case within the pessimist school, which also has good reason to 
accord the highest honours to `disinterested knowledge'. The objective man who no longer scolds 
or curses as the pessimist does, the ideal scholar in whom the scientific instinct, after 
thousandfold total and partial failure, for once comes to full bloom, is certainly one of the most 
precious instruments there are: but he belongs in the hand of one who is mightier. He is only an 
instrument, let us say a mirror ‑ he is not an `end in himself'. And the objective man is in fact a 
mirror: accustomed to submitting to whatever wants to be known, lacking any other pleasure 
than that provided by knowledge, by `mirroring' he waits until something comes along and then 
gently spreads himself out, so that not even the lightest footsteps and the fluttering of ghostly 
beings shall be lost on his surface and skin. Whatever still remains to him of his `own person' 
seems to him accidental, often capricious, more often disturbing: so completely has he become a 
passage and reflection of forms and events not his own. He finds it an effort to think about 
`himself', and not infrequently he thinks about himself mistakenly; he can easily confuse himself 
with another, he fails to understand his own needs and is in this respect alone unsubtle and 
negligent. Perhaps he is troubled by his health or by the pettiness and stuffiness of his wife and 
friends, or by a lack of companions and company yes, he forces himself to reflect on his troubles: 
but in vain! Already his thoughts are roaming, off to a more general case, and tomorrow he will 
know as little how to help himself as he did yesterday. He no longer knows how to take himself 
seriously, nor does he have the time for it: he is cheerful, not because he has no troubles but 
because he has no fingers and facility for dealing with his troubles. His habitual going out to 
welcome everything and every experience, the sunny and ingenuous hospitality with which he 
accepts all he encounters, his inconsiderate benevolence, his perilous unconcernedness over Yes 
and No: alas, how often he has to suffer for these his virtues! ‑ and as a human being in general 
he can all too easily become the caput mortuum of these virtues. If love and hatred are demanded 
of him, I mean love and hatred as God, woman and animal understand them ‑: he will do what 
he can and give what he can. But one ought not to be surprised if it is not very much ‑ if he 
proves spurious, brittle, questionable and soft. His love and his hatred are artificial and more of a 
tour de force, a piece of vanity and exaggeration. For he is genuine only when he can be 
objective: only in his cheerful totalism can he remain `nature' and `natural'. His mirroring soul, 
for ever polishing itself, no longer knows how to affirm or how to deny; he does not command, 
neither does he destroy. 'je ne méprise presque rien' ‑ he says with Leibniz: one should not 
overlook or underestimate the presque Nor is he an exemplar; he neither leads nor follows; he 
sets himself altogether too far off to have any reason to take sides between good and evil. When 
he was for so long confused with the philosopher, with the Caesarian cultivator and 
Gewaltmensch of culture, he was done much too great honour and what is essential in him was 
overlooked ‑ he is an instrument, something of a slave, if certainly the sublimest kind of slave, 
but in himself he is nothing ‑ presque rien! The objective man is an instrument, a precious, easily 
damaged and tarnished measuring instrument and reflecting apparatus which ought to be 
respected and taken good care of; but he is not an end, a termination and ascent, a 
complementary man in whom the rest of existence is justified, a conclusion ‑ and even less a 
beginning, a begetting and first cause, something solid, powerful and based firmly on itself that 
wants to be master: but rather only a delicate, empty, elegant, flexible mould which has first to 
wait for some content so as `to form' itself by it as a rule a man without content, a `selfless' man. 
Consequently nothing for women either, in parenthesis. 
 
208 
 
When a philosopher today gives us to understand that he is not a sceptic ‑ I hope the foregoing 
account of the objective spirit has brought this out? ‑ all the world is offended to hear it; 
thereafter he is regarded with a certain dread, there is so much one would like to ask him . . . 
indeed, among timid listeners, of whom there are nowadays a very great number, he is 
henceforth considered dangerous. It is as if, in his rejection of scepticism, they seemed to hear 
some evil, menacing sound from afar, as if some new explosive were being tested somewhere, a 
dynamite of the spirit, perhaps a newly discovered Russian nihiline, a pessimism bonae 
voluntatis which does not merely say No, will No, but ‑ dreadful thought! does No. Against this 
kind of `good will' ‑ a will to the actual active denial of life ‑ there is today confessedly no better 
sedative and soporific than scepticism, the gentle, gracious, lulling poppy scepticism; and even 
Hamlet is prescribed by the doctors of our time against the `spirit' and its noises under the 
ground. `Are our ears not already filled with nasty sounds?' says the sceptic as a friend of sleep 
and almost as a kind of security police: `this subterranean No is terrible! Be quiet, you 
pessimistic moles!' For the sceptic, that delicate creature, is all too easily frightened; his 
conscience is schooled to wince at every No, indeed even at a hard decisive Yes, and to sense 
something like a sting. Yes! and No! ‑ that is to him contrary to morality; on the other hand, he 
likes his virtue to enjoy a noble continence, perhaps by saying after Montaigne `What do I 
know?' Or after Socrates: `I know that I know nothing.' Or: `Here I do not trust myself, here no 
door stands open to me.' Or: `If it did stand open, why go straight in?' Or: `What is the point of 
hasty hypotheses? To make no hypothesis at all could well be a part of good taste. Do you 
absolutely have to go straightening out what is crooked? Absolutely have to stop up every hole 
with oakum? Is there not plenty of time? Does time not have time? Oh you rogues, are you 
unable to wait? Uncertainty too has its charms, the sphinx too is a Circe, Circe too was a 
philosopher.'‑ Thus does a sceptic console himself; and it is true he stands in need of some 
consolation. For scepticism is the most spiritual expression of a certain complex physiological 
condition called in ordinary language nervous debility and sickliness; it arises whenever races or 
classes long separated from one another are decisively and suddenly crossed. In the new 
generation, which has as it were inherited varying standards and values in its blood, all is unrest, 
disorder, doubt, experiment; the most vital forces have a retarding effect, the virtues themselves 
will not let one another grow and become strong, equilibrium, centre of balance, upright 
certainty are lacking in body and soul. But that which becomes most profoundly sick and 
degenerates in such hybrids is the will: they no longer have any conception of independence of 
decision, of the valiant feeling of pleasure in willing ‑ even in their dreams they doubt the 
`freedom of the will'. Our Europe of today, the scene of a senselessly sudden attempt at radical 
class ‑ and consequently race ‑ mixture, is as a result sceptical from top to bottom, now with that 
agile scepticism which springs impatiently and greedily from branch to branch, now gloomily 
like a cloud overcharged with question‑marks and often sick to death of its will! Paralysis of 
will: where does one not find this cripple sitting today! And frequently so dressed up! How 
seductively dressed up! There is the loveliest false finery available for this disease; and that most 
of that which appears in the shop windows today as `objectivity', `scientificality', `l'art pour l'art, 
`pure will‑less knowledge' is merely scepticism and will‑paralysis dressed up ‑ for this 
diagnosis of the European sickness I am willing to go bail. Sickness of will is distributed over 
Europe unequally: it appears most virulently and abundantly where culture has been longest, 
indigenous it declines according to the extent to which `the barbarian' still ‑ or again ‑ asserts his 
rights under the loose‑fitting garment of Western culture. In present‑day France, consequently, 
as one can as easily deduce as actually see, the will is sickest; and France, which has always 
possessed a masterly adroitness in transforming even the most fateful crises of its spirit into 
something charming and seductive, today really demonstrates its cultural ascendency over 
Europe as the school and showcase for all the fascinations of scepticism. The strength to will, 
and to will one thing for a long time, is somewhat stronger already in Germany, and stronger 
again in the north of Germany than in the centre of Germany; considerably stronger in England, 
Spain and Corsica, there in association with dullness, here with hardness of head ‑ not to speak 
of Italy, which is too young to know what it wants and first has to prove whether it is capable of 
willing ‑ but strongest of all and most astonishing in that huge empire‑in‑between, where 
Europe as it were flows back into Asia, in Russia. There the strength to will has for long been 
stored up and kept in reserve, there the will is waiting menacingly ‑ uncertain whether it is a will 
to deny or a will to affirm ‑ in readiness to discharge itself, to borrow one of the physicists' 
favourite words. It may need not only wars in India and Asian involvements to relieve Europe of 
the greatest danger facing it, but also internal eruptions, the explosion of the empire into small 
fragments, and above all the introduction of the parliamentary imbecility, including the 
obligation upon everyone to read his newspaper at breakfast. I do not say this, because I desire it: 
the reverse would be more after my heart I mean such an increase in the Russian threat that 
Europe would have to resolve to become equally threatening, namely to acquire a single will by 
means of a new caste dominating all Europe, a protracted terrible will of its own which could set 
its objectives thousands of years ahead ‑ so that the long-drawn-out comedy of its petty states 
and the divided will of its dynasties and democracies should finally come to an end. The time for 
petty politics is past: the very next century will bring with it the struggle for mastery over the 
whole earth ‑ the compulsion to grand politics. 
 
209 
 
To what extent the new warlike age upon which we Europeans have obviously entered may 
perhaps also be favourable to the evolution of a new and stronger species of scepticism: on that 
question I should like for the moment to speak only in a parable which amateurs of German 
history will easily understand. That unscrupulous enthusiast for tall handsome grenadiers who, as 
king of Prussia, brought into existence a military and sceptical genius ‑ and therewith at bottom 
that new type of German which has just triumphantly emerged ‑ the questionable mad father of 
Frederick the Great, himself had on one point the grasp and lucky clutch of genius: he knew what 
was then lacking in Germany and which deficiency was a hundred times more alarming and 
pressing than any deficiency in culture or social polish ‑ his antipathy for the youthful Frederick 
was the product of a deep instinctual fear. Men were lacking; and he suspected, with the bitterest 
vexation, that his own son was not enough of a man. In that he was deceived: but who would not 
have been deceived in his place? He saw his son lapse into the atheism, the esprit, the 
pleasure‑seeking frivolity of ingenious Frenchmen ‑ he saw in the background the great 
blood‑sucker, the spider scepticism, he suspected the incurable wretchedness of a heart which is 
no longer hard enough for evil or for good, of a broken will which no longer commands, can no 
longer command. But in the meantime there grew up in his son that more dangerous and harder 
new species of scepticism ‑ who knows to what extent favoured by precisely the father's hatred 
and the icy melancholy of a will sent into solitude? ‑ the scepticism of audacious manliness, 
which is related most closely to genius for war and conquest and which first entered Germany in 
the person of the great Frederick. This scepticism despises and yet grasps to itself; it undermines 
and takes into possession; it does not believe but retains itself; it gives perilous liberty to the 
spirit but it keeps firm hold on the heart; it is the German form of scepticism which, as a 
continuation of Frederick‑ism intensified into the most spiritual domain, for a long time brought 
Europe under the dominion of the German spirit and its critical and historical mistrust. Thanks to 
the indomitably strong and tough masculinity of the great German philologists and critical 
historians (who, seen aright, were also one and all artists in destruction and disintegration), there 
became established, gradually and in spite of all the romanticism in music and philosophy, a new 
conception of the German spirit in which the trait of manly scepticism decisively predominated: 
whether as intrepidity of eye, as bravery and sternness of dissecting hand, or as tenacious will for 
perilous voyages of discovery, for North Pole expeditions of the spirit beneath desolate and 
dangerous skies. There may be good reason for warm‑blooded and superficial humanitarians to 
cross themselves before precisely this spirit: cet esprit fataliste, ironique, mephistophelique 
Michelet calls it, not without a shudder. But if one wishes to appreciate what a mark of 
distinction is this fear of the `man' in the German spirit through which Europe was awoken from 
its `dogmatic slumber', one might like to recall the earlier conception which it had to overcome ‑ 
and how it is not very long since a masculinized woman could, with unbridled presumption, 
venture to commend the Germans to Europe's sympathy as gentle, good‑hearted, weak‑willed 
and poetic dolts. One should at last have a sufficiently profound comprehension of Napoleon's 
astonishment when he caught sight of Goethe: it betrays what had for centuries been thought was 
meant by the `German spirit'. 'Voila un Homme!' ‑ which is to say: `but that is a man! And I had 
expected only a German!' 
 
210 
 
Supposing, then, that in the image of the philosophers of the future some trait provokes the 
question whether they will not have to be sceptics in the sense last suggested, this would still 
designate only something about them ‑ and not them themselves. They might with equal 
justification let themselves be called critics; and they will certainly be experimenters. Through 
the name with which I have ventured to baptize them I have already expressly emphasized 
experiment and the delight in experiment: was this because, as critics body and soul, they like to 
employ experiment in, a new, perhaps wider, perhaps more dangerous sense? Will they, in their 
passion for knowledge, have to go further with audacious and painful experiments than the 
tender and pampered taste of a democratic century can approve of? ‑ There can be no doubt that 
these coming men will want to dispense least with those serious and not indubious qualities 
which distinguish the critic from the sceptic: I mean certainty in standards of value, conscious 
employment of a unity of method, instructed courage, independence and ability to justify 
oneself; indeed, they confess to taking a pleasure in negating and dissecting and to a certain self-
possessed cruelty which knows how to wield the knife with certainty and deftness even when the 
heart bleeds. They will be harder (and perhaps not always only against themselves) than humane 
men might wish, they will not consort with `truth' so as to be `pleased' by it or `elevated' and 
`inspired' - they will rather be little disposed to believe that troth of all things should be attended 
by such pleasures. They will smile, these stern spirits, if someone should say in their presence: 
`This thought elevates me: how should it not be true?' Or: `This work delights me: how should it 
not be beautiful?' Or: `This artist enlarges me: how should he not be great?' - perhaps they will 
have not only a smile but a feeling of genuine disgust for all such fawning enthusiasm, idealism, 
feminism, hermaphroditism, and he who could penetrate into the secret chambers of their hearts 
would hardly discover there the intention of reconciling `Christian feelings' with `classical taste' 
and perhaps even with `modern parliamentarianism' (as such a conciliatory spirit is said to exist 
even among philosophers in our very uncertain and consequently conciliatory century). Critical 
discipline and every habit conducive to cleanliness and severity in things of the spirit will be 
demanded by these philosophers not only of themselves: they could even display them as their 
kind of decoration - none the less they still do not want to be called critics on that account. It 
seems to them no small insult to philosophy when it is decreed, as is so happily done today: 
`Philosophy itself is criticism and critical science - and nothing whatever besides!' This 
evaluation of philosophy may enjoy the applause of every positivist in France and Germany ( 
and it might possibly have flattered the heart and taste of Kant: one should recall the titles of his 
principal works): our new philosophers will still say: critics are the philosophers' instruments and 
for that reason very far from being philosophers themselves! Even the great Chinaman of 
Königsberg was only a great critic. 
 
211 
 
I insist that philosophical labourers and men of science in general should once and for all cease 
to be confused with philosophers ‑ that on precisely this point `to each his own' should be strictly 
applied, and not much too much given to the former, much too little to the latter. It may be 
required for the education of a philosopher that he himself has also once stood on all those steps 
on which his servants, the scientific labourers of philosophy, remain standing ‑ have to remain 
standing; he himself must perhaps have been critic and sceptic and dogmatist and historian and, 
in addition, poet and collector and traveller and reader of riddles and moralist and seer and `free 
spirit' and practically everything, so as to traverse the whole range of human values and 
value‑feelings and be able to gaze from the heights into every distance, from the depths into 
every height, from the nook‑and‑comer into every broad expanse with manifold eyes and a 
manifold conscience. But all these are only preconditions of his task: this task itself demands 
something different ‑ it demands that he create values. Those philosophical labourers after the 
noble exemplar of Kant and Hegel have to take some great fact of evaluation ‑ that is to say, 
former assessments of value, creations of value which have become dominant and are for a while 
called `truths' ‑ and identify them and reduce them to formulas, whether in the realm of logic or 
of politics (morals) or of art. It is the duty of these scholars to take everything that has hitherto 
happened and been valued, and make it clear, distinct, intelligible and manageable, to abbreviate 
everything long, even `time' itself, and to subdue the entire past: a tremendous and wonderful 
task in the service of which every subtle pride, every tenacious will can certainly find 
satisfaction. Actual philosophers, however, are commanders and law givers: they say `thus it 
shall be!', it is they who determine the Wherefore and Whither of mankind, and they possess for 
this task the preliminary work of all the philosophical labourers, of all those who have subdued 
the past ‑ they reach for the future with creative hand, and everything that is or has been 
becomes for them a means, an instrument, a hammer. Their `knowing' is creating, their creating 
is a law‑giving, their will to truth is ‑mill to power. ‑ Are there such philosophers today? Have 
there been such philosophers? Must there not be such philosophers? . . . 
 
212 
 
It seems to me more and more that the philosopher, being necessarily a man of tomorrow and the 
day after tomorrow, has always found himself and bad to find himself in contradiction to his 
today: his enemy has always been the ideal of today. Hitherto these extraordinary promoters of 
mankind who have been called philosophers and have seldom felt themselves to be friends of 
knowledge but, rather, disagreeable fools and dangerous question‑marks ‑ have found their task, 
their hard, unwanted, unavoidable task, but finally the greatness of their task, in being the bad 
conscience of their age. By laying the knife vivisectionally to the bosom of the very virtues of 
the age they betrayed what was their own secret: to know a new greatness of man, a new 
untrodden path to his enlargement. Each time they revealed how much hypocrisy, indolence, 
letting oneself go and letting oneself fall, how much falsehood was concealed under the most 
honoured type of their contemporary morality, how much virtue was outlived; each time they 
said: `We have to go thither, out yonder, where you today are least at home.' In face of a world of 
`modern ideas' which would like to banish everyone into a comer and `speciality', a philosopher, 
assuming there could be philosophers today, would be compelled to see the greatness of man, the 
concept `greatness', precisely in his spaciousness and multiplicity, in his wholeness in diversity: 
he would even determine value and rank according to how much and how many things one could 
endure and take upon oneself, how far one could extend one's responsibility. Today the taste of 
the age and the virtue of the age weakens and attenuates the will, nothing is so completely timely 
as weakness of will: consequently, in the philosopher's ideal precisely strength of will, the 
hardness and capacity for protracted decisions, must constitute part of the concept `greatness'; 
with just as much justification as the opposite doctrine and the ideal of a shy, renunciatory, 
humble, selfless humanity was appropriate to an opposite age, to one such as, like the sixteenth 
century, suffered from its accumulation of will and the stormiest waters and flood‑tides of 
selfishness. In the age of Socrates, among men of nothing but wearied instincts, among 
conservative ancient Athenians who let themselves go ‑ `towards happiness', as they said, 
towards pleasure, as they behaved ‑ and who at the same time had in their mouth the old 
pretentious words to which their lives had long ceased to give them any right, irony was perhaps 
required for greatness of soul, that Socratic malicious certitude of the old physician and plebeian 
who cut remorselessly into his own flesh as he did into the flesh and heart of the `noble', with a 
look which said distinctly enough: 'do not dissemble before me! Here ‑ we are equal!' Today, 
conversely, when the herd animal alone obtains and bestows honours in Europe, when 'equality 
of rights' could all too easily change into equality in wrongdoing: I mean into a general war on 
everything rare, strange, privileged, the higher man, the higher soul, the higher duty„ the higher 
responsibility, creative fullness of power and mastery ‑ today, being noble, wanting to be by 
oneself, the ability to be different, independence and the need for self‑responsibility pertains to 
the concept 'greatness'; and the philosopher will betray something of his ideal when he asserts: 
'He shall be the greatest who can be the most solitary, the most concealed, the most divergent, 
the man beyond good and evil, the master of his virtues, the superabundant of will; this shall be 
called greatness: the ability to be as manifold as whole, as vast as full.' And, to ask it again: is 
greatness possible today? 
 
213 
 
What a philosopher is, is hard to learn, because it cannot be taught: one has to 'know' it from 
experience ‑ or one ought to be sufficiently proud not to know it. But that nowadays all the 
world talks of things of which it cannot have experience is most and worst evident in respect of 
philosophers and the philosophical states of mind ‑ very few know them or are permitted to 
know them, and all popular conceptions of them are false. Thus, for example, that genuinely 
philosophical combination of a bold exuberant spirituality which runs presto and a dialectical 
severity and necessity which never takes a false step is to most thinkers and scholars unknown 
from experience and consequently, if someone should speak of it in their presence, incredible. 
They imagine every necessity as a state of distress, as a painful compelled conformity and 
constraint; and thought itself they regard as something slow, hesitant, almost as toil and often as 
`worthy of the sweat of the noble' ‑ and not at all as something easy, divine, and a closest 
relation of high spirits and the dance! 'Thinking' and `taking something seriously', giving it 
'weighty consideration' ‑ to them these things go together: that is the only way they have 
'experienced' it. Artists may here have a more subtle scent: they know only too well that it is 
precisely when they cease to act 'voluntarily' and do everything of necessity that their feeling of 
freedom, subtlety, fullness of power, creative placing, disposing, shaping reaches its height ‑ in 
short, that necessity and 'freedom of will' are then one in them. In the last resort there exists an 
order of rank of states of soul with which the order of rank of problems accords; and the supreme 
problems repel without mercy everyone who ventures near them without being, through the 
elevation and power of his spirituality, predestined to their solution. Of what avail is it if nimble 
commonplace minds or worthy clumsy mechanicals and empiricists crowd up to them, as they so 
often do today, and with their plebeian ambition approach as it were this 'court of courts'! But 
coarse feet may never tread such carpets: that has been seen to in the primal law of things; the 
doors remain shut against such importunates, though they may batter and shatter their heads 
against them! For every elevated world one has to be born or, expressed more clearly, bred for it: 
one has a right to philosophy ‑ taking the word in the grand sense ‑ only by virtue of one's 
origin; one's ancestors, one's `blood' are the decisive thing here too. Many generations must have 
worked to prepare for the philosopher; each of his virtues must have been individually acquired, 
tended, inherited, incorporated, and not only the bold, easy, delicate course and cadence of his 
thoughts but above all the readiness for great responsibilities, the lofty glance that rules and 
looks down, the feeling of being segregated from the mob and its duties and virtues, the genial 
protection and defence of that which is misunderstood and calumniated, be it god or devil, the 
pleasure in and exercise of grand justice, the art of commanding, the breadth of will, the slow eye 
which seldom admires, seldom looks upward, seldom loves . . . 
Beyond Good And Evil 
By: Friedrich Nietzsche 
 
Part Seven: Our Virtues 
 
214 
 
Our virtues? ‑ it is probable that we too still have our virtues, although naturally they will not be 
those square and simple virtues on whose account we hold our grandfathers in high esteem but 
also hold them off a little. We Europeans of the day after tomorrow, we first‑born of the 
twentieth century with all our dangerous curiosity, our multiplicity and art of disguise, our 
mellow and as it were sugared cruelty in spirit and senses ‑ if we are to have virtues we shall 
presumably have only such virtues as have learned to get along with our most secret and heartfelt 
inclinations, with our most fervent needs: very well, let us look for them within our labyrinths! 
where, as is well known, such a variety of things lose themselves, such a variety of things get 
lost for ever. And is there anything nicer than to look for one's own virtues? Does this not almost 
mean: to believe in one's own virtue? But this `believing in one's virtue' ‑ is this not at bottom 
the same thing as that which one formerly called one's `good conscience', that venerable long 
conceptual pigtail which our grandfathers used to attach to the back of their heads and often 
enough to the back of their minds as well? It seems that, however little we may think ourselves 
old‑fashioned and grandfatherly‑respectable in other respects, in one thing we are none the less 
worthy grandsons of these grandfathers, we last Europeans with a good conscience: we too still 
wear their pigtail. ‑ Alas! if only you knew how soon, how very soon, things will be ‑ different! 
. . . 
 
215 
 
As in the realm of the stars it is sometimes two suns which determine the course of a planet, as in 
certain cases suns of differing colour shine on a single planet now with a red light, now with a 
green light, and sometimes striking it at the same time and flooding it with many colours: so we 
modern men are, thanks to the complicated mechanism of our `starry firmament', determined by 
differing moralities; our actions shine alternately in differing colours, they are seldom 
unequivocal ‑ and there are cases enough in which we perform many‑coloured actions. 
 
216 
 
Love of one's enemies? I think that has been well learned: it happens thousandfold today, on a 
large and small scale; indeed, occasionally something higher and more sublime happens ‑ we 
learn to despise when we love, and precisely when we love best but all this unconsciously, 
without noise, without ostentation, with that modesty and concealment of goodness which 
forbids the mouth solemn words and the formulas of virtue. Morality as a posture ‑ goes against 
our taste today. This too is progress: just as it was progress when religion as a posture finally 
went against the taste of our fathers, including hostility and Voltarian bitterness towards religion 
(and whatever else formerly belonged to the gesture‑language of free‑thinkers). It is the music 
in our conscience, the dance in our spirit, with which puritan litanies, moral preaching and 
philistinism will not chime. 
 
217 
 
Beware of those who set great store on being credited with moral tact and subtlety in moral 
discrimination! If once they blunder in our presence (not to speak of in respect of us) they never 
forgive us ‑ they unavoidably take to slandering and derogating us, even if they still remain our 
`friends'. ‑ Blessed are the forgetful: for they shall `have done' with their stupidities too. 
 
218 
 
The psychologists of France ‑ and where else today are there psychologists? ‑ have still not yet 
exhausted the bitter and manifold pleasure they take in the bêtise bourgeoise, just as if . . . 
enough, they thereby betray something. Flaubert, for example, the worthy citizen of Rouen, in 
the end no longer saw, heard or tasted anything else ‑ it was his mode of self‑torment and more 
refined cruelty. I now suggest, by way of a change ‑ for this is getting boring ‑ a new object of 
enjoyment: the unconscious cunning of the attitude adopted by all good, fat, worthy spirits of 
mediocrity towards more exalted spirits and their tasks, that subtle, barbed, jesuitical cunning 
which is a thousand times subtler than the taste and understanding of this middle class in its best 
moments ‑ subtler even than the understanding of its victims ‑ : another demonstration that, of 
all forms of intelligence discovered hitherto, `instinct' is the most intelligent. In brief: study, 
psychologists, the philosophy of the `rule' in its struggle with the `exception': there you have a 
spectacle fit for the gods and for divine maliciousness! Or, still more clearly: carry out 
vivisection on the `good man', on the 'homo bonae voluntatis' . . . on yourselves! 
 
219 
 
Moral judgement and condemnation is the favourite form of revenge of the spiritually limited on 
those who are less so, likewise a form of compensation for their having been neglected by nature, 
finally an occasion for acquiring spirit and becoming refined ‑ malice spiritualizes. Deep in their 
hearts they are glad there exists a standard according to which those overloaded with the goods 
and privileges of the spirit are their equals ‑ they struggle for the `equality of all before God' and 
it is virtually for that purpose that they need the belief in God. It is among them that the most 
vigorous opponents of atheism are to be found. Anyone who told them `a lofty spirituality is 
incompatible with any kind of worthiness and respectability of the merely moral man' would 
enrage them I shall take care not to do so. I should, rather, like to flatter them with my 
proposition that a lofty spirituality itself exists only as the final product of moral qualities; that it 
is a synthesis of all those states attributed to the `merely moral' man after they 'have been 
acquired one by one through protracted discipline and practice, perhaps in the course of whole 
chains of generations; that lofty spirituality is the spiritualization of justice and of that benevolent 
severity which knows itself empowered to maintain order of rank in the world among things 
themselves ‑ and not only among men 
 
220 
 
Now that the `disinterested' are praised so widely one has, perhaps not without some danger, to 
become conscious of what it is the people are really interested in, and what in general the things 
are about which the common man is profoundly and deeply concerned: including the educated, 
even the scholars and, unless all appearance deceives, perhaps the philosophers as well. The fact 
then emerges that the great majority of those things which interest and stimulate every higher 
nature and more refined and fastidious taste appear altogether `uninteresting' to the average man 
‑ if he none the less notices a devotion to these things, he calls it 'désintéressé and wonders how 
it is possible to act `disinterestedly'. There have been philosophers who have known how to lend 
this popular wonderment a seductive and mystical‑otherwordly expression ( ‑ perhaps because 
they did not know the higher nature from experience?) ‑ instead of stating the naked and obvious 
truth that the `disinterested' act is a very interesting and interested act, provided that . .. `And 
love?' ‑ what! Even an act performed out of love is supposed to be `unegoistic'? But you 
blockheads ‑ ! `And commendation of him who sacrifices?' ‑ But he who has really made 
sacrifices knows that he wanted and received something in return perhaps something of himself 
in exchange for something of himself ‑ that he gave away here in order to have more there, 
perhaps in general to be more or to feel himself `more'. But this is a domain of questions and 
answers in which a more fastidious taste prefers not to linger: truth has so much to stifle her 
yawns here when answers are demanded of her. She is, after all, a woman: one ought not to 
violate her. 
 
221 
 
It can happen, said a pettyfogging moral pedant, that I honour and respect an unselfish man: but 
not because he is unselfish but because he seems to me to have the right to be useful to another 
man at his own expense. Enough: the question is always who he is and who the other is. In one 
made and destined for command, for example, self‑abnegation and modest retirement would be 
not a virtue but the waste of a virtue: so it seems to me. Every unegoistic morality which takes 
itself as unconditional and addresses itself to everybody is not merely a sin against taste: it is an 
instigation to sins of omission, one seduction more under the mask of philanthropy ‑ and a 
seduction and injury for precisely the higher, rarer, privileged. Moralities must first of all be 
forced to bow before order of rank, their presumption must be brought home to them ‑ until they 
at last come to understand that it is immoral to say: `What is good for one is good for another.' ‑ 
Thus my moralistic pedant and bonhomme: does he deserve to be laughed at for thus exhorting 
moralities to morality? But one should not be too much in the right if one wants to have the 
laughers on one's own side; a grain of wrong is even an element of good taste. 
 
222 
 
Where pity and fellow‑suffering is preached today ‑ and, heard aright, no other religion is any 
longer preached now the psychologist should prick up his ears: through all the vanity, all the 
noise characteristic of these preachers (as it is of all preachers) he will hear a hoarse, groaning, 
genuine note of self‑contempt. It is part of that darkening and uglification of Europe which has 
now been going on for a hundred years (the earliest symptoms of which were first recorded in a 
thoughtful letter of Galiani's to Madame d'Epinay): if it is not the cause of it l The man of 
`modern ideas', that proud ape, is immoderately dissatisfied with himself: that is certain. He 
suffers: and his vanity would have him only `suffer with his fellows' . . . 
 
223 
 
The hybrid European ‑ a tolerably ugly plebeian, all in all definitely requires a costume: he 
needs history as his storeroom for costumes. He realizes, to be sure, that none of them fits him 
properly ‑ he changes and changes. Consider the nineteenth century with regard to these rapid 
predilections and changes in the style‑masquerade; notice too the moments of despair because 
`nothing suits' us ‑. It is in vain we parade ourselves as romantic or classical or Christian or 
Florentine or baroque or `national', in moribus et artibus: the `cap doesn't fit'! But the `spirit', 
especially the `historical spirit', perceives an advantage even in this despair: again and again 
another piece of the past and of foreignness is tried out, tried on, taken off, packed away, above 
all .studied ‑ we are the first studious age in puncto of `costumes', I mean those of morality, 
articles of faith, artistic tastes and religions, prepared as no other age has been for the carnival in 
the grand style, for the most spiritual Shrovetide laughter and wild spirits, for the transcendental 
heights of the most absolute nonsense and Aristophanic universal mockery. Perhaps it is 
precisely here that we are discovering the realm of our invention, that realm where we too can 
still be original, perhaps as parodists of world history and God's buffoons ‑ perhaps, even if 
nothing else of today has a future, precisely our laughter may still have a future! 
 
224 
 
The historical sense (or the capacity for divining quickly the order of rank of the evaluations 
according to which a people, a society, a human being has lived, the 'divinatory instinct' for the 
relationships of these evaluations, for the relation of the authority of values to the authority of 
effective forces): this historical sense, to which we Europeans lay claim as our speciality, has 
come to us in the wake of the mad and fascinating semi‑barbarism into which Europe has been 
plunged through the democratic mingling of classes and races ‑ only the nineteenth century 
knows this sense, as its sixth sense. 
 
The past of every form and mode of life, of cultures that formerly lay close beside or on top of 
one another, streams into us `modern souls' thanks to this mingling, our instincts now run back in 
all directions, we ourselves are a kind of chaos ‑ : in the end, as I said before, `the spirit' 
perceives its advantage in all this. Through our semi‑barbarism in body and desires we have 
secret access everywhere such as a noble age never had, above all the access to the labyrinth of 
unfinished cultures and to every semi‑barbarism which has ever existed on earth; and, in so far 
as the most considerable part of human culture hitherto has been semi‑barbarism, `historical 
sense' means virtually the sense and instinct for everything, the taste and tongue for everything: 
which at once proves it to be an ignoble sense. We enjoy Homer again, for instance: perhaps it is 
our happiest advance that we know how to appreciate Homer, whom the men of a noble culture 
(the French of the seventeenth century, for example, such as Saint Evremond, who reproached 
him for his esprit vaste, and even their dying echo, Voltaire) cannot and could not assimilate so 
easily ‑ whom they hardly permitted themselves to enjoy. The very definite Yes and No of their 
palate, their easily aroused disgust, their hesitant reserve with regard to everything strange, their 
horror of the tastelessness even of a lively curiosity, and in general that unwillingness of a noble 
and self‑sufficient culture to admit to a new desire, a dissatisfaction with one's own culture, an 
admiration for what is foreign: all this disposes them unfavourably towards even the best things 
in the world which are not their property and could not become their prey ‑ and no sense is so 
unintelligible to such men as the historical sense and its obsequious plebeian curiosity. It is no 
different with Shakespeare, that astonishing Spanish‑Moorish‑Saxon synthesis of tastes over 
which an ancient Athenian of the circle of Aeschylus would have half‑killed himself with 
laughter or annoyance: but we ‑ we accept precisely this confusion of colours, this medley of the 
most delicate, the coarsest and the most artificial, with a secret confidence and cordiality, we 
enjoy him as an artistic refinement reserved precisely for us and allow ourselves to be as little 
disturbed by the repellent fumes and the proximity of the English rabble in which Shakespeare's 
art and taste live as we do on the Chiaja of Naples, where we go our way enchanted and willing 
with all our senses alert, however much the sewers of the plebeian quarters may fill the air. That 
as men of the `historical sense' we have our virtues is not to be denied ‑ we are unpretentious, 
selfless, modest, brave, full of self‑restraint, full of devotion, very grateful, very patient, very 
accommodating ‑ with all that, we are perhaps not very `tasteful'. Let us finally confess it to 
ourselves: that which we men of the `historical sense' find hardest to grasp, to feel, taste, love, 
that which at bottom finds us prejudiced and almost hostile, is just what is complete and wholly 
mature in every art and culture, that which constitutes actual nobility in works and in men, their 
moment of smooth sea and halcyon self‑sufficiency, the goldness and coldness displayed by all 
things which have become perfect. Perhaps our great virtue of the historical sense necessarily 
stands opposed to good taste, or to the very best taste at any rate, and it is precisely the brief little 
pieces of good luck and transfiguration of human life that here and there come flashing up which 
we find most difficult and laboursome to evoke in ourselves: those miraculous moments when a 
great power voluntarily halted before the boundless and immeasurable ‑ when a superfluity of 
subtle delight in sudden restraint and petrifaction, in standing firm and fixing oneself, was 
enjoyed on a ground still trembling. Measure is alien to us, let us admit it to ourselves; what we 
itch for is the infinite, the unmeasured. Like a rider on a charging steed we let fall the reins 
before the infinite, we modern men, like semi‑barbarians ‑ and attain our state of bliss only 
when we are most ‑ in danger. 
 
225 
 
Whether it be hedonism or pessimism or utilitarianism or eudaemonism: all these modes of 
thought which assess the value of things according to pleasure and pain, that is to say according 
to attendant and secondary phenomena, are fore-ground modes of thought and naiveties which 
anyone conscious of creative powers and an artist's conscience will look down on with derision, 
though not without pity. Pity for you! That, to be sure, is not pity for social `distress', for 
`society' and its sick and unfortunate, for the vicious and broken from the start who lie all around 
us; even less is it pity for the grumbling, oppressed, rebellious slave classes who aspire after 
domination ‑ they call it `freedom'. Our pity is a more elevated, more farsighted pity ‑ we see 
how man is diminishing himself, how you are diminishing him! ‑ and there are times when we 
behold your pity with an indescribable anxiety, when we defend ourselves against this pity ‑ 
when we find your seriousness more dangerous than any kind of frivolity. You want if possible ‑ 
and there is no madder `if possible' to abolish suffering; and we? ‑ it really does seem that we 
would rather increase it and make it worse than it has ever been! Well‑being as you understand it 
‑ that is no goal, that seems to us an end! A state which soon renders man ludicrous and 
contemptible ‑ which makes it desirable that he should perish! The discipline of suffering, of 
great suffering ‑ do you not know that it is this discipline alone which has created every 
elevation of mankind hitherto? That tension of the soul in misfortune which cultivates its 
strength, its terror at the sight of great destruction, its inventiveness and bravery in undergoing, 
enduring, interpreting, exploiting misfortune, and whatever of depth, mystery, mask, spirit, 
cunning and greatness has been bestowed upon it ‑ has it not been bestowed through suffering, 
through the discipline of great suffering? In man, creature and creator are united: in man there is 
matter, fragment, excess, clay, mud, madness, chaos; but in man there is also creator, sculptor, 
the hardness of the hammer, the divine spectator and the seventh day ‑ do you understand this 
antithesis? And that your pity is for the `creature in man', for that which has to be formed, 
broken, forged, torn, burned, annealed, refined ‑ that which has to suffer and should suffer? And 
our pity ‑ do you not grasp whom our opposite pity is for when it defends itself against your pity 
as the worst of all pampering and weakening? ‑ Pity against pity, then! ‑ But, to repeat, there are 
higher problems than the problems of pleasure and pain and pity; and every philosophy that 
treats only of them is a piece of naivety. 
 
226 
 
We immoralists! ‑ This world which concerns as, in which we have to love and fear, this almost 
invisible, inaudible world of subtle commanding, subtle obeying, a world of `almost' in every 
respect, sophistical, insidious, sharp, tender: it is well defended, indeed, against clumsy 
spectators and familiar curiosity! We are entwined in an austere shirt of duty and cannot get out 
of it ‑ and in this we are `men of duty', we too! Sometimes, it is true, we may dance in our 
`chains' and between our `swords'; often, it is no less true, we gnash our teeth at it and frown 
impatiently at the unseen hardship of our lot. But do what we will, fools and appearances speak 
against us and say `these are men without duty' ‑ we always have fools and appearances against 
us! 
 
227 
 
Honesty ‑ granted that this is our virtue, from which we cannot get free, we free spirits ‑ well, let 
us labour at it with all love and malice and not weary of `perfecting' ourselves in our virtue, the 
only one we have: may its brightness one day overspread this ageing culture and its dull, gloomy 
seriousness like a gilded azure mocking evening glow! And if our honesty should one day none 
the less grow weary, and sigh, and stretch its limbs, and find us too hard, and like to have things 
better, easier, gentler, like an agreeable vice: let us remain bard, we last of the Stoics! And let us 
send to the aid of our honesty whatever we have of devilry in us ‑ our disgust at the clumsy and 
casual, our `nitimur in vetitum', our adventurer's courage, our sharp and fastidious curiosity, our 
subtlest, most disguised, most spiritual will to power and world‑overcoming which wanders 
avidly through all the realms of the future let us go to the aid of our `god' with all our `devils'! It 
is probable that we shall be misunderstood and taken for what we are not: but what of that! 
People will say: `Their "honesty" ‑ is their devilry and nothing more!' But what of that! And 
even if they were right! Have all gods hitherto not been such devils grown holy and been 
rebaptized? And what do we know of ourselves, when all's said and done? And what the spirit 
which leads us on would like to be called (it is a question of names)? And how many spirits we 
harbour? Our honesty, we free spirits ‑ let us see to it that our honesty does not become our 
vanity, our pomp and finery, our limitation, our stupidity! Every virtue tends towards stupidity, 
every stupidity towards virtue; `stupid to the point of saintliness' they say in Russia ‑ let us see to 
it that through honesty we do not finally become saints and bores! Is life not a hundred times too 
short to be ‑ bored in it? One would have to believe in eternal life to . . . 
 
228 
 
May I be forgiven the discovery that all moral philosophy hitherto has been boring and a 
soporific ‑ and that `virtue' has in my eyes been harmed by nothing more than it has been by this 
boringness of its advocates; in saying which, however, I should not want to overlook their 
general utility. It is important that as few people as possible should think about morality 
consequently it is very important that morality should not one day become interesting! But do 
not worry! It is still now as it has always been: I see no one in Europe who has (or propagates) 
any idea that thinking about morality could be dangerous, insidious, seductive ‑ that fatality 
could be involved! Consider, for example, the indefatigable, inevitable English utilitarians and 
with what clumsy and worthy feet they walk, stalk (a Homeric metaphor says it more plainly) 
along in the footsteps of Bentham, just as he himself had walked in the footsteps of the worthy 
Helvétius (no, he was not a dangerous man, this Helvétius, ce senateur Pococurante as Galiani 
called him ‑ ). No new idea, no subtle expression or turn of an old idea, not even a real history of 
what had been thought before: an impossible literature altogether, unless one knows how to 
leaven  it with a little malice. For into these moralists too (whom one has to read with mental 
reservations if one has to read them at all ‑ ) there has crept that old English vice called cant, 
which is moral tartuffery, this time concealed in the new form of scientificality; there are also 
signs of a secret struggle with pangs of conscience, from which a race of former Puritans will 
naturally suffer. (Is a moralist not the opposite of a Puritan? That is to say, as a thinker who 
regards morality as something questionable, as worthy of question‑marks, in short as a problem? 
Is moralizing not ‑ immoral?) Ultimately they all want English morality to prevail: inasmuch as 
mankind, or the `general utility', or `the happiness of the greatest number', no! the happiness of 
England would best be served; they would like with all their might to prove to themselves that to 
strive after English happiness, I mean after comfort and fashion (and, as the supreme goal, a seat 
in Parliament), is at the same time the true path of virtue, indeed that all virtue there has ever 
been on earth has consisted in just such a striving. Not one of all these ponderous herd animals 
with their uneasy conscience (who undertake to advocate the cause of egoism as the cause of the 
general welfare ‑ ) wants to know or scent that the `general welfare' is not an ideal, or a goal, or 
a concept that can be grasped at all, but only an emetic ‑ that what is right for one cannot by any 
means therefore be right for another, that the demand for one morality for all is detrimental to 
precisely the higher men, in short that there exists an order of rank between man and man, 
consequently also between morality and morality. They are a modest and thoroughly mediocre 
species of man, these English utilitarians, and, as aforesaid, in so far as they are boring one 
cannot think sufficiently highly of their utility. One ought even to encourage them: which is in 
part the objective of the following rhymes. 
 
Hail, continual plodders, hail! `Lengthen out the tedious tale', Pedant still in head and knee, Dull, 
of humour not a trace, Permanently commonplace, Sans génie et sans esprit! 
 
229 
 
In late ages which may be proud of their humaneness there remains so much fear, so much 
superstitious fear of the `savage cruel beast', to have mastered which constitutes the very pride of 
those more humane ages, that even palpable truths as if by general agreement, remain unspoken 
for centuries, because they seem as though they might help to bring back to life that savage beast 
which has been finally laid to rest. Perhaps I am risking something when I let one of these truths 
escape: let others capture it again and give it sufficient of the `milk of pious thoughts' for it to lie 
still and forgotten in its old corner. ‑ One should open one's eyes and take a new look at cruelty; 
one should at last grow impatient, so that the kind of immodest fat errors which have, for 
example, been fostered about tragedy by ancient and modern philosophers should no longer go 
stalking virtuously and confidently about. Almost everything we call `higher culture' is based on 
the spiritualization and intensification of cruelty ‑this is my proposition; the `wild beast' has not 
been laid to rest at all, it lives, it flourishes, it has merely become ‑ deified. That which 
constitutes the painful voluptuousness of tragedy is cruelty; that which produces a pleasing effect 
in so‑called tragic pity, indeed fundamentally in everything sublime up to the highest and most 
refined thrills of metaphysics, derives its sweetness solely from the ingredient of cruelty mixed 
in with it. What the Roman in the arena, the Christian in the ecstasies of the Cross, the Spaniard 
watching burnings or bullfights, the Japanese of today crowding in to the tragedy, the Parisian 
suburban workman who has a nostalgia for bloody revolutions, the Wagnerienne who, with will 
suspended, `experiences' Tristan and Isolde ‑ what all of these enjoy and look with secret ardour 
to imbibe is the spicy potion of the great Circe `cruelty'. Here, to be sure, we must put aside the 
thick‑wined psychology of former times which had to teach of cruelty only that it had its origin 
in the sight of the sufferings of others: there is also an abundant, over‑abundant enjoyment of 
one's own suffering, of making oneself suffer ‑ and wherever man allows himself to be 
persuaded to self‑denial in the religious sense, or to selfmutilation, as among Phoenicians and 
ascetics, or in general to desensualization, decarnalization, contrition, to Puritanical spasms of 
repentance, to conscience‑vivisection and to a Pascalian sacrifizio dell' intelletto, he is secretly 
lured and urged onward by his cruelty, by the dangerous thrills of cruelty directed against 
himself. Consider, finally, how even the man of knowledge, when he compels his spirit to 
knowledge which is counter to the inclination of his spirit and frequently also to the desires of 
his heart ‑ by saying No, that is, when he would like to affirm, love, worship ‑ disposes as an 
artist in and transfigurer of cruelty; in all taking things seriously and thoroughly, indeed, there is 
already a violation, a desire to hurt the fundamental will of the spirit, which ceaselessly strives 
for appearance and the superficial ‑ in all desire to know there is already a drop of cruelty. 
 
230 
 
Perhaps what I have said here of a `fundamental will of the spirit' may not be immediately 
comprehensible: allow me to explain. ‑ That commanding something which the people calls 
`spirit' wants to be master within itself and around itself and to feel itself master: out of 
multiplicity it has the will to simplicity, a will which binds together and tames, which is 
imperious and domineering. In this its needs and capacities are the same as those which 
physiologists posit for everything that lives, grows and multiplies. The power of the spirit to 
appropriate what is foreign to it is revealed in a strong inclination to assimilate the new to the 
old, to simplify the complex, to overlook or repel what is wholly contradictory: just as it 
arbitrarily emphasizes, extracts and falsifies to suit itself certain traits and lines in what is foreign 
to it, in every piece of `external world'. Its intention in all this is the incorporation of new 
`experiences', the arrangement of new things within old divisions ‑ growth, that is to say; more 
precisely, the feeling of growth, the feeling of increased power. 
 
This same will is served by an apparently antithetical drive of the spirit, a sudden decision for 
ignorance, for arbitrary shutting‑out, a closing of the windows, an inner denial of this or that 
thing, a refusal to let it approach, a kind of defensive posture against much that can be known, a 
contentment with the dark, with the closed horizon, an acceptance and approval of ignorance: all 
this being necessary according to the degree of its power to appropriate, its `digestive power', to 
speak in a metaphor ‑ and indeed `the spirit' is more like a stomach than anything else. It is here 
that there also belongs the occasional will of the spirit to let itself be deceived, perhaps with a 
mischievous notion that such and such is not the case, that it is only being allowed to pass for the 
case, a joy in uncertainty and ambiguity, an exultant enjoyment of the capricious narrowness and 
secrecy of a nook‑and‑corner, of the all too close, of the foreground, of the exaggerated, 
diminished, displaced, beautified, an enjoyment of the capriciousness of all these expressions of 
power. Finally there also belongs here that not altogether innocent readiness of the spirit to 
deceive other spirits and to dissemble before them, that continual pressing and pushing of a 
creative, formative, changeable force: in this the spirit enjoys the multiplicity and cunning of its 
masks, it enjoys too the sense of being safe that this brings ‑ for it is precisely through its protean 
arts that it is best concealed and protected) This will to appearance, to simplification, to the 
mask, to the cloak, in short to the superficial ‑ for every surface is a cloak ‑ is counteracted by 
that sublime inclination in the man of knowledge which takes a profound, many‑sided and 
thorough view of things and will take such a view: as a kind of cruelty of the intellectual 
conscience and taste which every brave thinker will recognize in himself, provided he has 
hardened and sharpened for long enough his own view of himself, as he should have, and is 
accustomed to stern discipline and stern language. He will say `there is something cruel in the 
inclination of my spirit' ‑ let the amiable and virtuous try to talk him out of that) In fact, it would 
be nicer if, instead of with cruelty, we were perhaps credited with an `extravagant honesty' ‑ we 
free, very free spirits ‑ and perhaps that will actually one day be our posthumous fame? In the 
meantime ‑ for it will be a long time before that happens ‑ we ourselves are likely to be least 
inclined to dress up in moralistic verbal tinsel and valences of this sort: all our labour hitherto 
has spoiled us for this taste and its buoyant luxuriousness. They are beautiful, glittering, jingling, 
festive words: honesty, love of truth, love of wisdom, sacrifice for the sake of knowledge, 
heroism of the truthful ‑ there is something about them that makes one's pride swell. But we 
hermits and marmots long ago became convinced that this worthy verbal pomp too belongs 
among the ancient false finery, lumber and gold‑dust of unconscious human vanity, and that 
under such flattering colours and varnish too the terrible basic text homo natura must again be 
discerned. For to translate man back into nature; to master the many vain and fanciful 
interpretations and secondary meanings which have been hitherto scribbled and daubed over that 
eternal basic text homo natura; to confront man henceforth with man in the way in which, 
hardened by the discipline of science, man today confronts the rest of nature, with dauntless 
Oedipus eyes and stopped‑up Odysseus ears, deaf to the siren songs of old metaphysical 
bird‑catchers who have all too long been piping to him `you are more! you are higher! you are of 
a different origin!' ‑ that may be a strange and extravagant task but it is a task ‑ who would deny 
that? Why did we choose it, this extravagant task? Or, to ask the question differently: `why 
knowledge at all?'‑ Everyone will ask us about that. And we, thus pressed, we who have asked 
ourselves the same question a hundred times, we have found and can find no better answer... 
 
231 
 
Learning transforms us, it does that which all nourishment does which does not merely `preserve' 
: as the physiologist knows. But at the bottom of us, `right down deep', there is, to be sure, 
something unteachable, a granite stratum of spiritual fate, of predetermined decision and answer 
to predetermined selected questions. In the case of every cardinal problem there speaks an 
unchangeable `this is I'; about man and woman, for example, a thinker cannot relearn but only 
learn fully ‑ only discover all that is `firm and settled' within him on this subject. One sometimes 
comes upon certain solutions to problems which inspire strong belief in us; perhaps one 
thenceforth calls them one's `convictions'. Later ‑ one sees them only as footsteps to 
self‑knowledge, signposts to the problem which we are ‑ more correctly, to the great stupidity 
which we are, to our spiritual fate, to the unteachable `right down deep'. ‑ Having just paid 
myself such a deal of pretty compliments I may perhaps be more readily permitted to utter a few 
truths about `woman as such': assuming it is now understood from the outset to how great an 
extent these are only ‑ my truths. 
 
232 
 
Woman wants to be independent: and to that end she is beginning to enlighten men about 
`woman as such' ‑ this is one of the worst developments in the general uglification of Europe. 
For what must these clumsy attempts on the part of female scientificality and self‑exposure not 
bring to light! Woman has so much reason for shame; in woman there is concealed so much 
pedanticism, superficiality, schoolmarmishness, petty presumption, petty unbridledness and petty 
immodesty ‑ one needs only to study her behaviour with children! .‑ which has fundamentally 
been most effectively controlled and repressed hitherto by fear of man. Woe when the 
`eternal‑boring in woman' ‑ she has plenty of that! ‑ is allowed to venture forth! When she 
begins radically and on principle to forget her arts and best policy: those of charm, play, the 
banishing of care, the assuaging of grief and taking lightly, together with her subtle aptitude for 
agreeable desires! Already female voices are raised which, by holy Aristophanes! make one 
tremble; there are threatening and medically explicit statements of what woman wants of man. Is 
it not in the worst of taste when woman sets about becoming scientific in that fashion? 
Enlightenment in this field has hitherto been the affair and endowment of men ‑ we remained 
`among ourselves' in this; and whatever women write about `woman', we may in the end reserve 
a good suspicion as to whether woman really wants or can want enlightenment about herself... 
Unless a woman is looking for a new adornment for herself in this way ‑ self‑adornment 
pertains to the eternal‑womanly, does it not? ‑ she is trying to inspire fear of herself ‑ perhaps 
she is seeking dominion. But she does not want truth: what is truth to a woman! From the very 
first nothing has been more alien, repugnant, inimical to woman than truth ‑ her great art is the 
lie, her supreme concern is appearance and beauty. Let us confess it, we men: it is precisely this 
art and this instinct in woman which we love and honour: we who have a hard time and for our 
refreshment like to associate with creatures under whose hands, glances and tender follies our 
seriousness, our gravity and profundity appear to us almost as folly. Finally I pose the question: 
has any woman ever conceded profundity to a woman's mind or justice to a woman's heart? And 
is it not true that on the whole `woman' has hitherto been slighted most by woman herself ‑ and 
not at all by us? ‑ We men want woman to cease compromising herself through enlightenment: 
just as it was man's care and consideration for woman which led the Church to decree: mulier 
taceat in ecclesia! It was to the benefit of woman when Napoleon gave the all too eloquent 
Madame de Staël to understand: mulier taceat in politicis! ‑ and I think it is a true friend of 
women who calls on them today: mulier taceat de muliere! 
 
233 
 
It betrays corruption of the instincts ‑ quite apart from the fact that it betrays bad taste ‑ when a 
woman appeals precisely to Madame Roland or Madame de Staël or Monsieur George Sand as if 
something in favour of `woman as such' were thereby demonstrated. Among men the 
above‑named are the three comic women as such ‑ nothing more! ‑ and precisely the best 
involuntary counter‑arguments against emancipation and female autocracy. 
 
234 
 
Stupidity in the kitchen; woman as cook; the dreadful thoughtlessness with which the 
nourishment of .the family and the master of the house is provided for! Woman does not 
understand what food means: and she wants to be the cook! If woman were a thinking creature 
she would, having been the cook for thousands of years, surely have had to discover the major 
facts of physiology, and likewise gained possession of the art of healing. It is through bad female 
cooks ‑ through the complete absence of reason in the kitchen, that the evolution of man has 
been longest retarded and most harmed: even today things are hardly any better. A lecture for 
high‑school girls. 
 
235 
 
There are fortunate turns of the spirit, there are epigrams, a little handful of words, in which an 
entire culture, a whole society is suddenly crystallized. Among these is Madame de Lambert's 
remark to her son: 'mon ami, me vous permettez jamais que de folies, qui vous feront grand 
plaisir' ‑ the most motherly and prudent remark, incidentally, that was ever addressed to a son. 
 
236 
 
That which Dante and Goethe believed of woman ‑ the former when he sang `ella guardava 
suso, ed io in lei', the latter when he translated it `the eternal‑womanly draws us upward'‑: I do 
not doubt that every nobler woman will resist this belief, for that is precisely what she believes of 
the eternal-manly . . . 
 
237 
 
Seven Proverbs for Women How the slowest tedium flees when a man comes on his knees! Age 
and scientific thought give even virtue some support. Sober garb and total muteness dress a 
woman with ‑ astuteness. Who has brought me luck today? God! ‑ and my couturier. Young: a 
cavern decked about. Old: a dragon sallies out. Noble name, a leg that's fine, man as well: oh 
were be mine! Few words, much meaning ‑ slippery ground, many a poor she‑ass has found! 
Men have hitherto treated women like birds which have strayed down to them from the heights: 
as something more delicate, more fragile, more savage, stranger, sweeter, soulful ‑ but as 
something which has to be caged up so that it shall not fly away. 
 
238 
 
To blunder over the fundamental problem of `man and woman', to deny here the most abysmal 
antagonism and the necessity of an eternally hostile tension, perhaps to dream here of equal 
rights, equal education, equal claims and duties: this is a typical sign of shallow‑mindedness, 
and a thinker who has proved himself to be shallow on this dangerous point shallow of instinct! ‑ 
may be regarded as suspect in general, more, as betrayed, as found out: he will probably be too 
`short' for all the fundamental questions of life, those of life in the future too, incapable of any 
depth. On the other hand, a man who has depth, in his spirit as well as in his desires, and also 
that depth of benevolence which is capable of hardness and severity and is easily confused with 
them, can think of woman only in an oriental way ‑ he must conceive of woman as a possession, 
as property with lock and key, as something predestined for service and attaining her fulfilment 
in service ‑ in this matter he must take his stand on the tremendous intelligence of Asia, on 
Asia's superiority of instinct, as the Greeks formerly did: they were Asia's best heirs and pupils 
and, as is well known, from Homer to the age of Pericles, with the increase of their culture and 
the amplitude of their powers, also became step by step more strict with women, in short more 
oriental. Flow necessary, how logical, horn humanly desirable even, this was: let each ponder for 
himself! 
 
239 
 
The weak sex has in no age been treated by men with such respect as it is in ours ‑ that pertains 
to the democratic inclination and fundamental taste, as does disrespectfulness to old age ‑: is it 
any wonder if this respect is immediately abused? She wants more, she learns to demand, in the 
end she finds this tribute of respect almost offensive, she would prefer competition for rights, 
indeed a real stand‑up fight: enough, woman loses in modesty. Let us add at once that she also 
loses in taste. She unlearns fear of man: but the woman who `unlearns fear' sacrifices her most 
womanly instincts. That woman should venture out when the fear‑inspiring in man, let us put it 
more precisely and say the man in man, is no longer desired and developed, is fair enough, also 
comprehensible enough; what is harder to comprehend is that, through precisely this fact ‑ 
woman degenerates. This is what is happening today: let us not deceive ourselves! Wherever the 
spirit of industry has triumphed over the military and aristocratic spirit woman now aspires to the 
economic and legal independence of a clerk: `woman as clerk' stands inscribed on the portal of 
the modern society now taking shape. As she thus seizes new rights, looks to become `master', 
and inscribes the `progress' of woman on her flags and banners, the reverse is happening with 
dreadful clarity: woman is retrogressing. Since the French Revolution the influence of woman in 
Europe has grown less in the same proportion as her rights and claims have grown greater; and 
the `emancipation of woman', in so far as it has been demanded and advanced by women 
themselves (and not only by male shallow‑pates), is thus revealed as a noteworthy symptom of 
the growing enfeeblement and blunting of the most feminine instincts. There is stupidity in this 
movement, an almost masculine stupidity, of which a real woman ‑ who is always a clever 
woman ‑ would have to be ashamed from the very heart. To lose her sense for the ground on 
which she is most sure of victory; to neglect to practise the use of her own proper weapons; to let 
herself go before the man, perhaps even `to the extent of producing a book', where formerly she 
kept herself in check and in subtle cunning humility; to seek with virtuous assurance to destroy 
man's belief that a fundamentally different ideal is wrapped up in woman, that there is something 
eternally, necessarily feminine; emphatically and loquaciously to talk man out of the idea that 
woman has to be maintained, cared for, protected, indulged like a delicate, strangely wild and 
often agreeable domestic animal; the clumsy and indignant parade of all of slavery and bondage 
that woman's position in the order of society has hitherto entailed and still entails (as if slavery 
were a counter‑argument and not rather a condition of every higher culture, of every 
enhancement of culture) ‑ what does all this mean if not a crumbling of the feminine instinct, a 
defeminizing? To be sure, there are sufficient idiotic friends and corrupters of woman among the 
learned asses of the male sex who advise woman to defeminize herself in this fashion and to 
imitate all the stupidities with which `man' in Europe, European `manliness', is sick ‑ who would 
like to reduce woman to the level of `general education', if not to that of newspaper reading and 
playing at politics. Here and there they even want to turn women into free‑spirits and literati: as 
if a woman without piety would not be something utterly repellent or ludicrous to a profound and 
godless man ‑; almost everywhere her nerves are being shattered by the most morbid and 
dangerous of all the varieties of music (our latest German music), and she is being rendered more 
and more hysterical with every day that passes and more and more incapable of her first and last 
profession, which is to bear strong children. There is a desire to make her in general more 
`cultivated' and, as they say, to make the `weak sex' strong through culture: as if history did not 
teach in the most emphatic manner possible that making human beings `cultivated' and making 
them weaker ‑ that is to say, enfeebling, fragmenting, contaminating, the force of the mill, have 
always gone hand in hand, and that the world's most powerful and influential women (most 
recently the mother of Napoleon) owed their power and ascendancy over men precisely to the 
force of their will ‑ and not to schoolmasters! That in woman which inspires respect and 
fundamentally fear is her mature, which is more `natural' than that of the man, her genuine, 
cunning, beast‑of‑prey suppleness, the tiger's claws beneath the glove, the naivety of her 
egoism, her ineducability and inner savagery, and how incomprehensible, capacious and 
prowling her desires and virtues are . . . That which, all fear notwithstanding, evokes pity for this 
dangerous and beautiful cat `woman' is that she appears to be more afflicted, more vulnerable, 
more in need of love and more condemned to disappointment than any other animal. Fear and 
pity: it is with these feelings that man has hitherto stood before woman, always with one foot in 
tragedy, which lacerates as it delights. ‑ What? And is this now over with? And is woman now 
being deprived of her enchantment? Is woman slowly being made boring? O Europe! Europe! 
We know the horned beast which always attracted you most, which again and again threatens 
you with danger! Your ancient fable could once again become `history' ‑ once again a monstrous 
stupidity could master you and carry you off! And no god concealed within it, no! merely an 
`idea', a `modern idea'! . . . 
Beyond Good And Evil 
By: Friedrich Nietzsche 
 
Part Eight: Peoples and Fatherlands 
 
240 
 
I have heard, once again for the fast time ‑ Richard Wagner's overture to the Meistersinger: it is 
a magnificent, overladen, heavy and late art which has the pride to presuppose for its 
understanding that two centuries of music are still living ‑ it is to the credit of the Germans that 
such a pride was not misplaced! What forces and juices, what seasons and zones are not mixed 
together here! Now it seems archaic, now strange, acid and too young, it is as arbitrary as it is 
pompous‑traditional, it is not infrequently puckish, still more often rough and uncouth ‑ it has 
fire and spirit and at the same time the loose yellow skin of fruits which ripen too late. It flows 
broad and full: and suddenly a moment of inexplicable hesitation, as it were a gap between cause 
and effect, an oppression producing dreams, almost a nightmare ‑ but already the old stream of 
wellbeing broadens and widens again, the stream of the most manifold wellbeing, of happiness 
old and new, very much including the happiness of the artist in himself, which he has no desire 
to conceal, his happy, astonished knowledge of the masterliness of the means he is here 
employing, new, newly acquired, untried artistic means, as his art seems to betray to us. All in 
all, no beauty, nothing of the south or of subtle southerly brightness of sky, nothing of 
gracefulness, no dance, hardly any will to logic; a certain clumsiness, even, which is actually 
emphasized, as if the artist wanted to say: `it is intentional'; a cumbersome drapery, something 
capriciously barbarous and solemn, a fluttering of venerable learned lace and conceits; 
something German in the best and worst sense of the word, something manifold, formless and 
inexhaustible in the German fashion; a certain German powerfulness and overfullness of soul 
which is not afraid to hide itself among the refinements of decay ‑ which perhaps feels itself 
most at ease there; a true, genuine token of the German soul, which is at once young and aged, 
over‑mellow and still too rich in future. This kind of music best expresses what I consider true of 
the Germans: they are of the day before yesterday and the day after tomorrow ‑ thy have as yet 
no today. 
 
241 
 
We `good Europeans': we too have our hours when we permit ourselves a warm‑hearted 
patriotism, a lapse and regression into old loves and narrownesses ‑ I have just given an example 
of it ‑ hours of national ebullition, of patriotic palpitations and floods of various outmoded 
feelings. More ponderous spirits than we may have done with what in our case is confined to a 
few hours and is then over only after a longer period: one takes half a year, another half a life, 
according to the speed and power with which he digests it and of his `metabolism'. Indeed, I can 
imagine dull, sluggish races which, even in our fast‑moving Europe, would need half a century 
to overcome such atavistic attacks of patriotism and cleaving to one's native soil and to be 
restored to reason, I mean to `good Europeanism'. And, while digressing on this possibility, I 
chanced to become the ear‑witness of a conversation between two old `patriots' ‑ it is clear they 
were both hard of hearing and thus spoke all the louder. `He has and knows as much philosophy 
as a peasant or a fraternity student', said one of them: `he is still innocent. But what does that 
matter nowadays! It is the age of the masses: they fall on their faces before anything massive. 
And in politics likewise. A statesman who builds for them another Tower of Babel, some 
monstrosity of empire and power, they call "great" ‑ what does it matter if we, more cautious and 
reserved than they, persist in the old belief that it is the great idea alone which can bestow 
greatness on a deed or a cause. Suppose a statesman were to put his nation in the position of 
having henceforth to pursue "grand politics", for which it was ill equipped and badly prepared by 
nature, so that it had to sacrifice its old and sure virtues for the sake of a new and doubtful 
mediocrity ‑suppose a statesman were to condemn his nation to "politicizing" at all, while that 
nation had hitherto had something better to do and think about and in the depths of its soul still 
retained a cautious disgust for the restlessness, emptiness and noisy wrangling of those nations 
which actually do practise politics ‑ suppose such a statesman were to goad the slum-bering 
passions and desires of his nation, turn its former diffidence and desire to stand aside into a 
stigma and its pre-dilection for foreign things and its secret infiniteness into a fault, devalue its 
most heartfelt inclinations in its own eyes, reverse its conscience, make its mind narrow and its 
taste "national" ‑ what! a statesman who did all this, a statesman for whom his nation would 
have to atone for all future time, assuming it had a future ‑ would such a statesman be great?' 
`Undoubtedly!' the other patriot replied vehemently: `other-wise he would not have been able to 
do it! Perhaps you may say it was mad to want to do such a thing? But perhaps every-thing great 
has been merely mad to begin with!' ‑ `Misuse of words!' cried the other: ‑ 'strong! strong! 
strong and mad! Not great!' ‑ The old men had obviously grown heated as they thus shouted 
their `truths' in one another's faces; I, however, in my happiness and beyond, considered how 
soon a stronger will become master of the strong; and also that when one nation becomes 
spiritually shallower there is a compensation for it: another nation becomes deeper. ‑ 
 
242 
 
Whether that which now distinguishes the European be called `civilization' or `humanization' or 
'progress'; whether one calls it simply, without implying any praise or blame, the democratic 
movement in Europe: behind all the moral and political foregrounds indicated by such formulas a 
great physio-logical process is taking place and gathering greater and ever greater impetus ‑ the 
process of the assimilation of all Euro-peans, their growing detachment from the conditions 
under which races dependent on climate and class originate, their increasing independence of any 
definite milieu which, through making the same demands for centuries, would like to inscribe 
itself on soul and body ‑ that is to say, the slow emergence of an essentially supra‑national and 
nomadic type of man which, physiologically speaking, possesses as its typical distinction a 
maximum of the art and power of adaptation. This process of the becoming European, the tempo 
of which can be retarded by great relapses but which will perhaps precisely through them gain in 
vehemence and depth ‑ the still‑raging storm and stress of `national feeling' belongs here, 
likewise the anarchism now emerging ‑: this process will probably lead to results which its naive 
propagators and panegyrists, the apostles of `modern ideas', would be least inclined to anticipate. 
The same novel conditions which will on average create a levelling and mediocritizing of man ‑ 
a useful, industrious, highly serviceable and able herd‑animal man ‑ are adapted in the highest 
degree to giving rise to exceptional men of the most dangerous and enticing quality. For while 
that power of adapta-tion which continually tries out changing conditions and begins a new 
labour with every new generation, almost with every new decade, cannot make possible the 
powerfulness of the type; while the total impression produced by such future Europeans will 
probably be that of multifarious, garrulous, weak‑willed and highly employable workers who 
need a master, a commander, as they need their daily bread; while, therefore, the democratization 
of Europe will lead to the production of a type prepared for slavery in the subtlest sense: in 
individual and exceptional cases the strong man will be found to turn out stronger and richer than 
has perhaps ever happened before ‑thanks to the unprejudiced nature of his schooling, thanks to 
the tremendous multiplicity of practice, art and mask. What I mean to say is that the 
democratization of Europe is at the same time an involuntary arrangement for the breeding of 
tyrants ‑ in every sense of that word, including the most spiritual. 
 
243 
 
I hear with pleasure that our sun is moving rapidly in the direction of the constellation of 
Hercules: and I hope that men on the earth will in this matter emulate the sun. And we at their 
head, we good Europeans! 
 
244 
 
There was a time when it was usual to call the Germans `profound', and this was meant as a term 
of distinction: now, when the most successful type of the new Germanism thirsts after quite 
different honours and perhaps feels that anything profound lacks `dash', it is almost timely and 
patriotic to doubt whether that commendation of former days was not founded on self‑deception: 
whether German profundity is not at bottom something different and worse ‑ and something 
which, thanks be to God, one is on the verge of successfully getting rid o£ Let us therefore try to 
learn anew about German profundity: all that is required is a little vivisection of the German 
soul. ‑ The German soul is above all manifold, of diverse origins, put together and superimposed 
rather than actually constructed: the reason for that is its source. A German who would make 
bold to say `two souls, alas, within my bosom dwell' would err very widely from the truth, more 
correctly he would fall short of the truth by a large number of souls. As a people of the most 
tremendous mixture and mingling of races, perhaps even with a preponderance of the pre‑Aryan 
element, as the `people of the middle' in every sense, the Germans are more incomprehensible, 
more comprehensive, more full of contradictions, more unknown, more incalculable, more 
surprising, even more frightening to themselves than other peoples are ‑ they elude definition 
and are for that reason alone the despair of the French. It is characteristic of the Germans that the 
question `what is German?' never dies out among them. Kotzebue certainly knew his Germans 
well enough: `we are known' they cried to him jubilantly but Sand too thought she knew them. 
Jean Paul knew what he was doing when he declared himself incensed by Fichte's mendacious 
but patriotic flatteries and exaggerations ‑ but it is likely that Goethe thought otherwise of the 
Germans than jean Paul did, even though he agreed with him about Fichte. 
What Goethe really thought of the Germans? ‑ But there were many things round him about 
which he never expressed himself clearly and his whole life long he knew how to maintain a 
subtle silence ‑ he had no doubt good reason. What is certain is that it was not `the Wars of 
Liberation' which made him look up more cheerfully, any more than it was the French 
Revolution ‑ the event on account of which he rethought his Faust, indeed the whole problem of 
`man', was the appearance of Napoleon. There exist statements by Goethe in which, as if he was 
from another country, he condemns with impatient severity that which the Germans take pride 
in: the celebrated German Gemüt he once defined as `indulgence of others' weaknesses, and 
one's own'. Was he wrong? ‑ it is characteristic of the Germans that one is seldom wholly wrong 
about them. The German soul has corridors and interconnecting corridors in it there are caves, 
hiding‑places, dungeons in it; its disorder possesses much of the fascination of the mysterious; 
the German is acquainted with the hidden paths to chaos. And as everything loves its symbol, the 
German loves clouds and all that is obscure, becoming, crepuscular, damp and dismal: the 
uncertain, unformed, shifting, growing of every kind he feels to be `profound'. The German 
himself is not, he is becoming, he is `developing'. `Development' is thus the truly German 
discovery and lucky shot in the great domain of philosophical formulas ‑ a ruling concept which, 
in concert with German beer and German music, is at work at the Germanization of all Europe. 
Foreigners are astonished and drawn by the enigmas which the contradictory nature at the bottom 
of the German soul propounds to them (which Hegel reduced to a system and Richard Wagner 
finally set to music). `Good‑natured and malicious' ‑ such a juxtaposition, nonsensical in respect 
of any other people, is unfortunately too often justified in Germany: you have only to live among 
Swabians for a while! The ponderousness of the German scholar, his social insipidity, gets on 
frightfully well with an inner rope‑walking and easy boldness before which all the gods have 
learned fear. If you want the `German soul' demonstrated ad oculos, you have only to look into 
German taste, into German arts and customs: what boorish indifference to 'taste'! How the 
noblest and the commonest here stand side by side! How disorderly and wealthy this whole 
psychical household is! The German drags his soul, he drags everything he experiences. He 
digests his events badly, he is never 'done' with them; German profundity is often only a sluggish 
'digestion'. And just as all chronic invalids, all dyspeptics, have an inclination for comfort, so the 
German loves 'openness' and 'uprightness': how comfortable it is to be open and upright! Perhaps 
it is the most dangerous and successful disguise the German knows how to use today, this 
confiding, accommodating, cards‑on‑the‑table German honesty: it is his real Mephistophelean 
art, with its aid he can 'still go far'! The German lets himself go, and as he does so he gazes out 
with true blue empty German eyes ‑ and other countries at once confound him with his 
dressing‑gown! ‑ I meant to say: whatever 'German profundity' may be ‑ and when we are quite 
by ourselves we shall perhaps permit ourselves to laugh at it? we would do well to hold its 
appearance and good name in respect henceforth too and not to sell former old reputation as the 
profound nation too cheaply for Prussian 'dash' and Berlin wit and sand. It is clever for a people 
to be considered, to get itself considered, profound, clumsy, good‑natured, honest, not clever: it 
might even be ‑ profound! Finally: one ought not to be ashamed of one's own name ‑it is not for 
nothing one is called das 'tiusche' Volk, das Täusche‑Volk . . . 
 
245 
 
The 'good old days' are gone, in Mozart they sang themselves out ‑ how fortunate are we that his 
rococo still speaks to us, that his 'good company', his tender enthusiasm, his child‑like delight in 
chinoiserie and ornament, his politeness of the heart, his longing for the graceful, the enamoured, 
the dancing, the tearful, his faith in the south may still appeal to some residue in us! Alas, some 
day it will all be gone ‑ but who can doubt that understanding and taste for Beethoven will be 
gone first! ‑ for Beethoven was only the closing cadence of a transition of style and stylistic 
breach and not, as Mozart was, the closing cadence of a great centuries‑old European taste. 
Beethoven is the intermediary between an old mellow soul that is constantly crumbling and a 
future over‑young soul that is constantly arriving; upon his music there lies that twilight of 
eternal loss and eternal extravagant hope ‑ the same light in which Europe lay bathed when it 
dreamed with Rousseau, when it danced around the Revolution's Tree of Liberty and finally 
almost worshipped before Napoleon. But how quickly this feeling is now fading away, how hard 
it is today even to know of this feeling ‑ how strange to our ears sounds the language of 
Rousseau, Schiller, Shelley, Byron, in whom together the same European destiny that in 
Beethoven knew how to sing found its way into words! ‑ Whatever German music came 
afterwards belongs to romanticism, that is to say to a movement which was, historically 
speaking, even briefer, even more fleeting, even more superficial than that great interlude, that 
transition of Europe from Rousseau to Napoleon and to the rise of democracy. Weber: but what 
are Freischütz and Oberon to us today! Or Marshner's Hans Heilin and Vampyr! 
Or even Wagner's Tannhäuser! It is dead, if not yet forgotten, music. All this music of 
romanticism was, moreover, insufficiently noble, insufficiently musical, to maintain itself 
anywhere but in the theatre and before the mob; it was from the very first second‑rate music to 
which genuine musicians paid little regard. It was otherwise with Felix Mendelssohn, that 
halcyon master who was, on account of his lighter, purer, happier soul, speedily honoured and 
just as speedily forgotten: as the beautiful intermezzo of German music. But as for Schumann, 
who took things seriously and was also taken seriously from the first ‑ he was the last to found a 
school ‑: do we not now think it a piece of good fortune, a relief, a liberation that this 
Schumann‑romanticism has been overcome? Schumann, fleeing into the 'Saxon Switzerland' of 
his soul, his nature half Werther, half Jean Paul, not at all like Beethoven, not at all Byronic! ‑ 
his music for Manfred is a mistake and misunderstanding to the point of injustice ‑ Schumann, 
with his taste which was fundamentally a petty taste (that is to say a dangerous inclination, 
doubly dangerous among Germans, for quiet lyricism and drunkenness of feeling), continually 
going aside, shyly withdrawing and retiring, a noble effeminate delighting in nothing but 
anonymous weal and woe, a kind of girl and noli me tangere from the first: this Schumann was 
already a merely German event in music, no longer a European event, as Beethoven was, as to an 
even greater extent Mozart had been ‑ in him German music was threatened with its greatest 
danger, that of losing the voice for the .coal of Europe and sinking into a merely national affair. 
 
246 
 
‑ What a torment books written in German are for him who has a third earl How disgustedly he 
stands beside the slowly turning swamp of sounds without resonance, of rhythms that do not 
dance, which the Germans call a 'book'! Not to mention the German who reads books! How 
lazily, how reluctantly, how badly he reads! How many Germans know, or think they ought to 
know, that there is art in every good sentence ‑ art that must be grasped if the sentence is to be 
understood! A misunderstanding of its tempo, for example: and the sentence itself is 
misunderstood! That one must be in no doubt about the syllables that determine the rhythm, that 
one should feel the disruption of a too‑severe symmetry as intentional and as something 
attractive, that one should lend a refined and patient ear to every staccato, every rubato, that one 
should divine the meaning in the sequence of vowels and diphthongs and how delicately and 
richly they can colour and recolour one another through the order in which they come: who 
among book‑reading Germans has sufficient goodwill to acknowledge such demands and duties 
and to listen to so much art and intention in language? In the end one simply `has no ear for it': 
and so the greatest contrasts in style go unheard and the subtlest artistry is .squandered as if on 
the deaf. ‑ These were my thoughts when I noticed how two masters of the art of prose were 
clumsily and unsuspectingly confused with one another: one from whom words fall cold and 
hesitantly as from the roof of a damp cavern ‑ he calculates on the heavy dullness of their sound 
and echo ‑ and another who handles his language like a supple blade and feels from his arm 
down to his toes the perilous delight of the quivering, over‑sharp steel that wants to bite, hiss, 
cut 
 
247 
 
How little German style has to do with sound and the ears is shown by the fact that precisely our 
good musicians write badly. The German does not read aloud, does not read for the ear, but 
merely with his eyes: he has put his ears away in the drawer. In antiquity, when a man read ‑ 
which he did very seldom ‑ he read to himself aloud, and indeed in a loud voice; it was a matter 
for surprise if someone read quietly, and people secretly asked themselves why he did so. In a 
loud voice: that is to say, with all the crescendos, inflections, variations of tone and changes of 
tempo in which the ancient public world took pleasure. In those days the rules of written style 
were the same as those of spoken style; and these rules depended in part on the astonishing 
development, the refined requirements of ear and larynx, in part on the strength, endurance and 
power of ancient lungs. A period is, in the sense in which the ancients understood it, above all a 
physio-logical whole, inasmuch as it is composed by a single breath. Periods such as appear with 
Demosthenes or Cicero, rising twice and sinking twice and all within a single breath: these are 
delights for men of antiquity, who knew from their own schooling how to value the virtue in 
them, the rarity and difficulty of the delivery of such a period ‑ the have really no right to the 
grand period, we moderns, we who are short of breath in every sense! For these ancients were 
one and all themselves dilettantes in rhetoric, consequently connoisseurs, consequently critics ‑ 
and so they drove their orators to extremes; in the same way as, in the last century, when all 
Italians and Italiennes knew how to sing, virtuosity in singing (and therewith also the art of 
melody ‑) attained its height with them. In Germany, however, there was (until very recently, 
when a kind of platform eloquence began shyly and heavily to flap its young wings) really but 
one species of public and ,fairly artistic oratory: that from the pulpit. The preacher was the only 
one in Germany who knew what a syllable, what a word weighs, how a sentence strikes, rises, 
falls, runs, runs to an end, he alone had a conscience in his ears, often enough a bad conscience: 
for there is no lack of reasons why it is precisely the German who rarely achieves proficiency in 
oratory, or almost always achieves it too late. The masterpiece of German prose is therefore, as is 
to be expected, the masterpiece of its great preacher: the Bible has been the best German book 
hitherto. Compared with Luther's Bible almost everything else is merely `literature' ‑ a thing that 
has not grown up in Germany and therefore has not taken and does not take root in German 
hearts: as the Bible has done. 
 
248 
 
There are two kinds of genius: the kind which above all begets and wants to beget, and the kind 
which likes to be fructified and to give birth. And likewise there are among peoples of genius 
those upon whom has fallen the woman's problem of pregnancy and the secret task of forming, 
maturing, perfecting ‑ the Greeks, for example, were a people of this kind, and so were the 
French ‑; and others who have to fructify and become the cause of new orders of life ‑ like the 
Jews, the Romans and, to ask it in all modesty, the Germans?‑peoples tormented and enraptured 
by unknown fevers and irresistibly driven outside themselves, enamoured of and lusting after 
foreign races (after those which `want to be fructified') and at the same time hungry for 
dominion, like everything which knows itself full of generative power and consequently `by the 
grace of God'. These two kinds of genius seek one another, as man and woman do; but they also 
misunderstand one another ‑ as man and woman do. 
 
249 
 
Every people has its own tartuffery and calls it its virtues. The best that one is one does not know 
‑ one cannot know. 
 
250 
 
What Europe owes to the Jews? ‑ Many things, good and bad, and above all one thing that is at 
once of the best and the worst: the grand style in morality, the dreadfulness and majesty of 
infinite demands, infinite significances, the whole romanticism and sublimity of moral 
questionabilities ‑ and consequently precisely the most attractive, insidious and choicest part of 
those iridescences and seductions to life with whose afterglow the sky of our European culture, 
its evening sky, is now aflame ‑ and perhaps burning itself up. We artists among the spectators 
and philosophers are ‑ grateful to the Jews for this. 
 
251 
 
 
If a people is suffering and wants to suffer from nationalistic nervous fever and political 
ambition, it must be expected that all sorts of clouds and disturbances ‑ in short, little attacks of 
stupidity ‑ will pass over its spirit into the bargain: among present‑day Germans, for example, 
now the anti‑French stupidity, now the anti‑Jewish, now the anti‑Polish, now the 
Christian‑romantic, now the Wagnerian, now the Teutonic, now the Prussian (just look at those 
miserable historians, those Sybels and Treitschkes, with their thickly bandaged heads ‑), and 
whatever else these little obfuscations of the German spirit and conscience may be called. May it 
be forgiven me that I too, during a daring brief sojourn in a highly infected area, did not remain 
wholly free of the disease and began, like the rest of the world, to entertain ideas about things 
that were none of my business: first symptom of the political infection. About the Jews, for 
example: listen. ‑ I have never met a German who was favourably inclined towards the Jews; 
and however unconditionally all cautious and politic men may have repudiated real anti‑Jewism, 
even this caution and policy is not directed against this class of feeling itself but only against its 
dangerous immoderation, and especially against the distasteful and shameful way in which this 
immoderate feeling is expressed ‑ one must not deceive oneself about that. That Germany has an 
ample sufficiency of Jews, that the German stomach, German blood has difficulty (and will 
continue to have difficulty for a long time to come) in absorbing even this quantum of `Jew' ‑ as 
the Italians, the French, the English have absorbed them through possessing a stronger digestion 
‑: this is the clear declaration and language of a universal instinct to which one must pay heed, in 
accordance with which one must act. `Let in no more Jews! And close especially the doors to the 
East (also to Austria)!' ‑ thus commands the instinct of a people whose type is still weak and 
undetermined, so that it could easily be effaced, easily extinguished by a stronger race. The Jews, 
however, are beyond all doubt the strongest, toughest and purest race at present living in Europe; 
they know how to prevail even under the worst conditions (better even than under favourable 
ones), by means of virtues which one would like to stamp as vices ‑ thanks above all to a 
resolute faith which does not need to be ashamed before `modem ideas.'; they change, when they 
change, only in the way in which the Russian Empire makes its conquests ‑ an empire that has 
time and is not of yesterday ‑: namely, according to the principle `as slowly as possible'! A 
thinker who has the future of Europe on his conscience will, in all the designs he makes for this 
future, take the Jews into account as he will take the Russians, as the immediately surest and 
most probable factors in the great game and struggle of forces. That which is called a `nation' in 
Europe today and is actually more of a res facto than nata (indeed sometimes positively 
resembles a res ficta et picta ‑) is in any case something growing, young, easily disruptable, not 
yet a race, let alone such an aere perennius as the Jewish type is: these `nations' should certainly 
avoid all hot‑headed rivalry and hostility very carefully! That the Jews could, if they wanted ‑ or 
if they were compelled, as the anti‑Semites seem to want ‑ even now predominate, indeed quite 
literally rule over Europe, is certain; that they are not planning and working towards that is 
equally certain. In the meantime they are, rather, wanting and wishing, even with some 
importunity, to be absorbed and assimilated by and into Europe, they are longing to be finally 
settled, permitted, respected somewhere and to put an end to the nomadic life, to the `Wandering 
Jew' ‑; one ought to pay heed to this inclination and impulse (which is perhaps even a sign that 
the Jewish instincts are becoming milder) and go out to meet it: for which it would perhaps be a 
good idea to eject the anti‑Semitic ranters from the country. Go out to meet it with all caution, 
with selectivity; much as the English nobility do. It is plain that the stronger and already more 
firmly formed types of the new Germanism could enter into relations with them with the least 
hesitation; the aristocratic officer of the March, for example: it would be interesting in many 
ways to see whether the genius of money and patience (and above all a little mind and 
spirituality, of which there is a plentiful lack in the persons above mentioned ‑) could not be 
added and bred into the hereditary art of commanding and obeying, in both of which the 
abovementioned land is today classic. But here it is fitting that I should break off my cheerful 
Germanomaniac address: for already I am touching on what is to me serious, on the `European 
problem' as I understand it, on the breeding of a new ruling caste for Europe. 
 
252 
 
They are no philosophical race ‑ these English: Bacon signifies an attack on the philosophical 
spirit in general, Hobbes, Hume and Locke a debasement and devaluation of the concept 
`philosopher' for more than a century. It was against Hume that Kant rose up; it was Locke of 
whom Schelling had a right to say: je méprise Locke'; in their struggle against the English-
mechanistic stultification of the world, Hegel and Schopenhauer were (with Goethe) of one 
accord: those two hostile brother geniuses who strove apart towards the antithetical poles of the 
German spirit and in doing so wronged one another as only brothers wrong one another. ‑ What 
is lacking in England and always has been lacking was realized well enough by that semi‑actor 
and rhetorician, the tasteless muddlehead Carlyle, who tried to conceal behind passionate 
grimaces what he knew about himself: namely what was lacking in Carlyle ‑ real power of 
spirituality, real depth of spiritual insight, in short philosophy. ‑ It is characteristic of such an 
unphilosophical race that they should cling firmly to Christianity: they need its discipline if they 
are to become `moral' and humane. The Englishman, gloomier, more sensual, stronger of will 
and more brutal than the German ‑ is for just that reason, as the more vulgar of the two, also 
more pious than the German: he is in greater need of Christianity. To finer nostrils even this 
English Christianity possesses a true English by‑scent of the spleen and alcoholic excess against 
which it is with good reason employed as an antidote ‑ the subtler poison against the coarser: 
and indeed a subtle poisoning is in the case of coarse peoples already a certain progress, a step 
towards spiritualization. English coarseness and peasant seriousness still finds its most tolerable 
disguise in Christian gestures and in praying and psalm‑singing: more correctly, it is best 
interpreted and given a new meaning by those things; and as for those drunken and dissolute 
cattle who formerly learned to grunt morally under the constraint of Methodism and more 
recently as the `Salvation Army', a spasm of penitence may really be the highest achievement of 
`humanity' to which they can be raised: that much may fairly be conceded. But what offends in 
even the most humane Englishman is, to speak metaphorically (and not metaphorically), his lack 
of music: he has in the movements of his soul and body no rhythm and dance, indeed not even 
the desire for rhythm and dance, for `music'. Listen to him speak; watch the most beautiful 
Englishwomen walk ‑ in no land on earth are there more beautiful doves and swans ‑ finally: 
listen to them sing! But I ask too much . . . 
 
253 
 
There are truths which are recognized best by mediocre minds because they are most suited to 
them, there are truths which possess charm and seductive powers only for mediocre spirits one is 
brought up against this perhaps disagreeable proposition just at the moment because the spirit of 
respectable but mediocre Englishmen ‑ I name Darwin, John Stuart Mill and Herbert Spencer ‑is 
starting to gain ascendancy in the midregion of European taste. Who indeed would doubt that it 
is useful for ouch spirits to dominate for a while? It would be a mistake to regard exalted spirits 
who fly off on their own as especially well adapted to identifying, assembling and making 
deductions from a host of little common facts ‑ as exceptions they are, rather, from the first in no 
very favourable position with respect to the `rules'. After all, they have more to do than merely 
know something new ‑ namely to be something new, to signify something new, to represent new 
values! The gulf between knowing and being able is perhaps wider, also more uncanny, than one 
thinks: the man who is able in the grand style, the creator, might possibly have to be ignorant 
while, on the other hand, for scientific discoveries such as Darwin's a certain narrowness, aridity 
and industrious conscientiousness, something English in short, may not be an unfavourable 
disposition. ‑ Finally, let us not forget that the English, with their profound averageness, have 
once before brought about a collective depression of the European spirit: that which is called 
`modern ideas' or `the ideas of the eighteenth century' or even `French ideas' ‑ that is to say, that 
which the German spirit has risen against in profound disgust ‑ was of English origin, there can 
be no doubt about that. The French have been only the apes and actors of these ideas, also their 
finest soldiers, also unhappily their first and most thorough victims: for through the damnable 
Anglomania of `modem ideas' the awe française has finally grown so thin and emaciated that 
today one recalls her sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, her profound passionate strength, her 
noble inventiveness, almost with disbelief. But one must hang on with one's teeth to this 
proposition of historical equity and defend it against the prejudice of the day: European noblesse 
‑ of feeling, of taste, of custom, in short noblesse in every exalted sense of the word ‑ is the 
work and invention of France, European vulgarity, the plebeianism of modern ideas, that of ‑ 
England. 
 
254 
 
Even now France is still the seat of Europe's most spiritual and refined culture and the leading 
school of taste: but one has to know how to find this `France of taste'. He who belongs to it keeps 
himself well hidden ‑ it may be only a small number in whom it lives and moves, and they, 
perhaps, men whose legs are not of the strongest, some of them fatalists, gloomy, sick, some of 
them spoilt and artificial, such men as have an ambition to hide themselves. One thing they all 
have in common: they shut their ears to the raving stupidity and the noisy yapping of the 
democratic bourgeois. Indeed, it is a coarse and stupid France that trundles in the foreground 
today ‑ it recently celebrated, at Victor Hugo's funeral, a veritable orgy of tastelessness and at 
the same time self‑admiration. Something else too they have in common: a great will to resist 
spiritual Germanization ‑ and an even greater inability to do so! Perhaps Schopenhauer has now 
become more at home and indigenous in this France of the spirit, which is also a France of 
pessimism, than he ever was in Germany; not to speak of Heinrich Heine, who has long since 
entered into the flesh and blood of the more refined and demanding lyric poets of Paris, or of 
Hegel, who today, in the shape of Taine ‑ that is to say, in that of the first of living historians 
exercises an almost tyrannical influence. As for Richard Wagner, however: the more French 
music learns to shape itself according to the actual needs of the âme moderne, the more will it 
`Wagnerize', that one can safely predict ‑ it is doing so sufficiently already! There are 
nevertheless three things which, despite all voluntary and involuntary Germanization and 
vulgarization of taste, the French can still today exhibit with pride as their inheritance and 
possession and as an indelible mark of their ancient cultural superiority in Europe. Firstly, the 
capacity for artistic passions, for devotion to `form', for which, together with a thousand others, 
the term fart pour fart has been devised ‑ it has been present in France for three hundred years 
and, thanks to their respect for the `small number', has again and again made possible a kind of 
literary chamber music not to be found anywhere else in Europe ‑. The second thing by which 
the French can argue their superiority to the rest of Europe is their ancient. manifold, moralistic 
culture, by virtue of which one finds on average even in little romanciers of the newspapers and 
chance boulevardiers de Paris a psychological sensitivity and curiosity of which in Germany, for 
example, they have no conception (not to speak of having the thing itself!). The Germans lack 
the couple of centuries of moralistic labour needed for this, a labour which, as aforesaid, France 
did not spare itself; he who calls the Germans `naive' on that account commends them for a fault. 
(As antithesis to German inexperience and innocence in voluptate psychologica, which is not too 
distantly related to the boringness of German company ‑ and as the most successful expression 
of a genuine French curiosity and inventiveness in this domain of delicate thrills, one should 
observe Henri Beyle, that remarkable anticipator and forerunner who ran with a Napoleonic 
tempo through his Europe, through several centuries of the European soul, as a detector and 
discoverer of his soul ‑ it needed two generations to overtake him, to divine once more some of 
the riddles which tormented and delighted him, this strange Epicurean and question‑mark who 
was France's last great psychologist ‑.) There is yet a third claim to superiority: in the French 
nature there exists a half‑achieved synthesis of north and south which makes them understand 
many things and urges them to do many things which an Englishman will never understand. 
Their temperament, periodically turning towards the south and away from the south, in which the 
Provençal and Ligurian blood from time to time foams over, preserves them from dreary 
northern grey‑on‑grey and sunless concept‑ghoulishness and anaemia ‑ the disease of our 
German taste against whose excess one has at just this moment very resolutely prescribed blood 
and iron, that is to say `grand politics' (in accordance with a dangerous therapeutic which has 
certainly taught me how to wait but has not yet taught me how to hope ‑). Even now there exists 
in France an understanding in advance and welcome for those rarer and rarely contented men 
who are too comprehensive to find their satisfaction in any kind of patriotism and know how to 
love the south in the north and the north in the south ‑ for the born Midlanders, the `good 
Europeans'. ‑ It was for them that Bizet made music, that last genius to perceive a new beauty 
and a new seduction ‑ who has discovered a region of the south in music. 
 
255 
 
Against German music I feel all sorts of precautions should be taken. Suppose one loves the 
south as I love it, as a great school of convalescence, for all the diseases of senses and spirit, as a 
tremendous abundance of sun and transfiguration by sun, spreading itself over an autonomous 
existence which believes in itself: well, such a person will learn to be somewhat on guard against 
German music because, by spoiling his taste again, it will also spoil his health again. Such a 
southerner, not by descent but by faith, must, if he dreams of the future of music, also dream of 
the redemption of music from the north and have in his ears the prelude to a deeper, mightier, 
perhaps wickeder and more mysterious music, a supra‑German music which does not fade, turn 
yellow, turn pale at the sight of the blue voluptuous sea and the luminous sky of the 
Mediterranean, as all German music does; a supra‑European music which holds its own even 
before the brown sunsets of the desert, whose soul is kindred to the palm‑tree and knows how to 
roam and be at home among great beautiful solitary beasts of prey .... I could imagine a music 
whose rarest magic would consist in this, that it no longer knew anything of good and evil, 
except that perhaps some sailor's homesickness, some golden shadow and delicate weakness 
would now and then flit across it: an art that would see fleeing towards it from a great distance 
the colours of a declining, now almost incomprehensible moral world, and would be hospitable 
and deep enough to receive such late fugitives. 
 
256 
 
Thanks to the morbid estrangement which the lunacy of nationality has produced and continues 
to produce between the peoples of Europe, thanks likewise to the shortsighted and hasty‑handed 
politicians who are with its aid on top today and have not the slightest notion to what extent the 
politics of disintegration they pursue must necessarily be only an interlude ‑ thanks to all this, 
and to much else that is altogether unmentionable today, the most unambiguous signs are now 
being overlooked, or arbitrarily and lyingly misinterpreted, which declare that Europe wants to 
become one. In all the more profound and comprehensive men of this century the general 
tendency of the mysterious workings of their souls has really been to prepare the way to this new 
synthesis and to anticipate experimentally the European of the future: only in their foregrounds, 
or in hours of weakness, in old age perhaps, were they among the `men of the fatherland' ‑ they 
were only taking a rest from themselves when they became `patriots'. I think of men such as 
Napoleon, Goethe, Beethoven, Stendhal, Heinrich Heine, Schopenhauer; I must not be blamed if 
I also include Richard Wagner among them: one should not let oneself be misled about him by 
his own misunderstandings geniuses of his sort seldom have the right to understand themselves ‑ 
and even less, to be sure, by the unseemly noise with which he is opposed and resisted today in 
France: the fact none the less remains that French lute romanticism of the forties and Richard 
Wagner belong most closely and intimately together. They are related, fundamentally related, in 
all the heights and depths of their needs: it is Europe, the one Europe, whose soul forces its way 
longingly up and out through their manifold and impetuous art ‑ whither? into a new light? 
towards a new sun? But who could express precisely what all these masters of new means of 
speech themselves did not know how to express clearly? What is certain is that they were 
tormented by the same storm and stress, that they sought in the same way, these last great 
seekers! One and all dominated by literature up to their eyes and ears ‑ the first artists formed 
and cultivated by world literature ‑ most of them even writers and poets themselves and 
mediators and minglers of the arts and senses (as a musician Wagner belongs among painters, as 
a poet among musicians, as an artist as such among actors); one and all fanatics for expression 
`at any cost' ‑ I call particular attention to Delacroix, Wagner's closest relation ‑ one and all 
great discoverers in the realm of the sublime, also of the ugly and horrible, even greater 
discoverers in effects, in display, in the art of the shop window, one and all talents far beyond 
their genius ‑ virtuosos through and through, with uncanny access to everything that seduces, 
lures, constrains, overwhelms, born enemies of logic and straight lines, constantly hankering 
after the strange, the exotic, the monstrous, the crooked, the self‑contradictory; as human beings 
Tantaluses of the will, plebeians risen in the world who knew themselves incapable, in their lives 
and in their works, of a noble tempo, a lento ‑ think of Balzac, for instance ‑ unbridled workers, 
almost destroying themselves through work; antinomians, fomenters of moral disorder, 
ambitious, insatiable men without balance or enjoyment; one and all collapsing and sinking at 
last before the Christian Cross (and with every right: for who among them would have been 
profound or primary enough for a philosophy of anti‑christ) ‑ on the whole an audacious‑daring, 
splendidly violent, high‑flying type of higher men who bore others up with them and whose lot 
it was to teach their century ‑ and it is the century of the mob! ‑ the concept `higher man' . . . . 
Let the German friends of Richard Wagner deliberate whether there is in Wagnerian art anything 
simply German, or whether it is not precisely its distinction that it derives from supra‑German 
sources and impulses: in considering which it should not be underestimated how indispensable 
Paris was for the cultivation of his type, how the depth of his instinct drew him precisely thither 
at the most decisive time, and how his whole manner of appearance and self‑apostolate could 
perfect itself only by his seeing its French socialist model. Perhaps a subtler comparison will 
reveal that, to the credit of Richard Wagner's German nature, he fashioned stronger, more daring, 
more severe and more elevated things than a nineteenth‑century Frenchman could have done ‑ 
thanks to the circumstance that we Germans are still closer to barbarism than the French ‑; 
perhaps the most remarkable thing Wagner created is even inaccessible, inimitable to the entire, 
so late Latin race for ever and not only for the present: the figure of Siegfried, that very free 
human being who may indeed be much too free, too hard, too cheerful, too healthy, too 
anti‑Catholic for the taste of peoples of an ancient, mellow culture. He may even have been a sin 
against romanticism, this anti‑Romantic Siegfried: well, Wagner amply atoned for this sin in his 
old, melancholy days when ‑ anticipating a taste which has since become political ‑ he began, 
with the religious vehemence characteristic of him, if not to walk at any rate to preach the road to 
Rome. ‑ That these last words shall not be misunderstood I shall call to my aid a few powerful 
rhymes which will reveal what I mean to less refined ears too ‑ what I object to in `late Wagner' 
and his Parsifal music: 
 
Is this still German? 
From German heart this sultry ululating?  
Of German body this self‑lacerating? 
German, this altar‑priest prostration, 
This incense‑perfumed stimulation? 
German this reeling, stumbling, tumbling, 
This muddy booming bim‑bam‑bumbling, 
This nunnish ogling, Ave‑hour‑bell chiming, 
This false‑ecstatic higher‑than‑heaven climbing? 
‑ Is this still German?  
Reflect! And then your answer frame:  
For what you hear is Rome ‑ Rome's faith in all but name! 
Beyond Good And Evil 
By: Friedrich Nietzsche 
 
Part Nine : What Is Noble? 
 
257. 
 
Every elevation of the type "man," has hitherto been the work of an aristocratic society and so it 
will always be--a society believing in a long scale of gradations of rank and differences of worth 
among human beings, and requiring slavery in some form or other. Without the pathos of 
distance, such as grows out of the incarnated difference of classes, out of the constant out-
looking and down-looking of the ruling caste on subordinates and instruments, and out of their 
equally constant practice of obeying and commanding, of keeping down and keeping at a 
distance--that other more mysterious pathos could never have arisen, the longing for an ever new 
widening of distance within the soul itself, the formation of ever higher, rarer, further, more 
extended, more comprehensive states, in short, just the elevation of the type "man," the 
continued "self-surmounting of man," to use a moral formula in a supermoral sense. To be sure, 
one must not resign oneself to any humanitarian illusions about the history of the origin of an 
aristocratic society (that is to say, of the preliminary condition for the elevation of the type 
"man"): the truth is hard. Let us acknowledge unprejudicedly how every higher civilisation 
hitherto has originated! Men with a still natural nature, barbarians in every terrible sense of the 
word, men of prey, still in possession of unbroken strength of will and desire for power, threw 
themselves upon weaker, more moral, more peaceful races (perhaps trading or cattle-rearing 
communities), or upon old mellow civilisations in which the final vital force was flickering out 
in brilliant fireworks of wit and depravity. At the commencement, the noble caste was always the 
barbarian caste: their superiority did not consist first of all in their physical, but in their psychical 
power--they were more complete men (which at every point also implies the same as "more 
complete beasts"). 
 
258. 
 
Corruption--as the indication that anarchy threatens to break out among the instincts, and that the 
foundation of the emotions, called "life," is convulsed--is something radically different according 
to the organisation in which it manifests itself. When, for instance, an aristocracy like that of 
France at the beginning of the Revolution, flung away its privileges with sublime disgust and 
sacrificed itself to an excess of its moral sentiments, it was corruption:-- it was really only the 
closing act of the corruption which had existed for centuries, by virtue of which that aristocracy 
had abdicated step by step its lordly prerogatives and lowered itself to a function of royalty (in 
the end even to its decoration and parade-dress). The essential thing, however, in a good and 
healthy aristocracy is that it should not regard itself as a function either of the kingship or the 
commonwealth, but as the significance and highest justification thereof--that it should therefore 
accept with a good conscience the sacrifice of a legion of individuals, who, for its sake, must be 
suppressed and reduced to imperfect men, to slaves and instruments. Its fundamental belief must 
be precisely that society is not allowed to exist for its own sake, but only as a foundation and 
scaffolding, by means of which a select class of beings may be able to elevate themselves to their 
higher duties, and in general to a higher existence: like those sun-seeking climbing plants in 
Java--they are called Sipo Matador, --which encircle an oak so long and so often with their arms, 
until at last, high above it, but supported by it, they can unfold their tops in the open light, and 
exhibit their happiness. 
 
259. 
 
To refrain mutually from injury, from violence, from exploitation, and put one's will on a par 
with that of others: this may result in a certain rough sense in good conduct among individuals 
when the necessary conditions are given (namely, the actual similarity of the individuals in 
amount of force and degree of worth, and their co-relation within one organisation). As soon, 
however, as one wished to take this principle more generally, and if possible even as the 
fundamental principle of society, it would immediately disclose what it really is--namely, a Will 
to the denial of life, a principle of dissolution and decay. Here one must think profoundly to the 
very basis and resist all sentimental weakness: life itself is essentially appropriation, injury, 
conquest of the strange and weak, suppression, severity, obtrusion of peculiar forms, 
incorporation, and at the least, putting it mildest, exploitation;--but why should one for ever use 
precisely these words on which for ages a disparaging purpose has been stamped? Even the 
organisation within which, as was previously supposed, the individuals treat each other as equal-
-it takes place in every healthy aristocracy--must itself, if it be a living and not a dying 
organisation, do all that towards other bodies, which the individuals within it refrain from doing 
to each other: it will have to be the incarnated Will to Power, it will endeavour to grow, to gain 
ground, attract to itself and acquire ascendency--not owing to any morality or immorality, but 
because it lives, and because life is precisely Will to Power. On no point, however, is the 
ordinary consciousness of Europeans more unwilling to be corrected than on this matter; people 
now rave everywhere, even under the guise of science, about coming conditions of society in 
which "the exploiting character" is to be absent:-- that sounds to my ears as if they promised to 
invent a mode of life which should refrain from all organic functions. "Exploitation" does not 
belong to a depraved, or imperfect and primitive society: it belongs to the nature of the living 
being as a primary organic function; it is a consequence of the intrinsic Will to Power, which is 
precisely the Will to Life.--Granting that as a theory this is a novelty--as a reality it is the 
fundamental fact of all history: let us be so far honest towards ourselves! 
 
260. 
 
In a tour through the many finer and coarser moralities which have hitherto prevailed or still 
prevail on the earth, I found certain traits recurring regularly together, and connected with one 
another, until finally two primary types revealed themselves to me, and a radical distinction was 
brought to light. There is master-morality and slave-morality; --I would at once add, however, 
that in all higher and mixed civilisations, there are also attempts at the reconciliation of the two 
moralities; but one finds still oftener the confusion and mutual misunderstanding of them, indeed 
sometimes their close juxtaposition--even in the same man, within one soul. The distinctions of 
moral values have either originated in a ruling caste, pleasantly conscious of being different from 
the ruled--or among the ruled class, the slaves and dependents of all sorts. In the first case, when 
it is the rulers who determine the conception "good," it is the exalted, proud disposition which is 
regarded as the distinguishing feature, and that which determines the order of rank The noble 
type of man separates from himself the beings in whom the opposite of this exalted, proud 
disposition displays itself: he despises them. Let it at once be noted that in this first kind of 
morality the antithesis "good" and "bad" means practically the same as "noble" and 
"despicable";--the antithesis "good" and "evil" is of a different origin. The cowardly, the timid, 
the insignificant, and those thinking merely of narrow utility are despised; moreover, also, the 
distrustful, with their constrained glances, the self-abasing, the dog-like kind of men who let 
themselves be abused, the mendicant flatterers, and above all the liars:--it is a fundamental belief 
of all aristocrats that the common people are untruthful. "We truthful ones"--the nobility in 
ancient Greece called themselves. It is obvious that everywhere the designations of moral value 
were at first applied to men; and were only derivatively and at a later period applied to actions; it 
is a gross mistake, therefore, when historians of morals start with questions like, "Why have 
sympathetic actions been praised?" The noble type of man regards himself as a determiner of 
values; he does not require to be approved of; he passes the judgment: "What is injurious to me 
is injurious in itself"; he knows that it is he himself only who confers honour on things; he is a 
creator of values. He honours whatever he recognises in himself: such morality equals self-
glorification. In the foreground there is the feeling of plenitude, of power, which seeks to 
overflow, the happiness of high tension, the consciousness of a wealth which would fain give 
and bestow:--the noble man also helps the unfortunate, but not--or scarcely--out of pity, but 
rather from an impulse generated by the super-abundance of power. The noble man honours in 
himself the powerful one, him also who has power over himself, who knows how to speak and 
how to keep silence, who takes pleasure in subjecting himself to severity and hardness, and has 
reverence for all that is severe and hard. "Wotan placed a hard heart in my breast," says an old 
Scandinavian Saga: it is thus rightly expressed from the soul of a proud Viking. Such a type of 
man is even proud of not being made for sympathy; the hero of the Saga therefore adds 
warningly: "He who has not a hard heart when young, will never have one." The noble and brave 
who think thus are the furthest removed from the morality which sees, precisely in sympathy, or 
in acting for the good of others, or in desinteressement, the characteristic of the moral; faith in 
oneself, pride in oneself, a radical enmity and irony towards "selflessness," belong as definitely 
to noble morality, as do a careless scorn and precaution in presence of sympathy and the "warm 
heart."--It is the powerful who know how to honour, it is their art, their domain for invention. 
The profound reverence for age and for tradition--all law rests on this double reverence,--the 
belief and prejudice in favour of ancestors and unfavourable to newcomers, is typical in the 
morality of the powerful; and if, reversely, men of "modern ideas" believe almost instinctively in 
progress and the "future," and are more and more lacking in respect for old age, the ignoble 
origin of these "ideas" has complacently betrayed itself thereby. A morality of the ruling class, 
however, is more especially foreign and irritating to present-day taste in the sternness of its 
principle that one has duties only to one's equals; that one may act towards beings of a lower 
rank, towards all that is foreign, just as seems good to one, or "as the heart desires," and in any 
case "beyond good and evil": it is here that sympathy and similar sentiments can have a place. 
The ability and obligation to exercise prolonged gratitude and prolonged revenge both only 
within the circle of equals,--artfulness in retaliation, raffinement of the idea in friendship, a 
certain necessity to have enemies (as outlets for the emotions of envy, quarrelsomeness, 
arrogance--in fact, in order to be a good friend)a: all these are typical characteristics of the noble 
morality, which, as has been pointed out, is not the morality of "modern ideas," and is therefore 
at present difficult to realise, and also to unearth and disclose.--It is otherwise with the second 
type of morality, slave-morality. Supposing that the abused, the oppressed, the suffering, the 
unemancipated, the weary, and those uncertain of themselves should moralise, what will be the 
common element in their moral estimates? Probably a pessimistic suspicion with regard to the 
entire situation of man will find expression, perhaps a condemnation of man, together with his 
situation. The slave has an unfavourable eye for the virtues of the powerful; he has a scepticism 
and distrust, a refinement of distrust of everything "good" that is there honoured--he would fain 
persuade himself that the very happiness there is not genuine. On the other hand, those qualities 
which serve to alleviate the existence of sufferers are brought into prominence and flooded with 
light; it is here that sympathy, the kind, helping hand, the warm heart, patience, diligence, 
humility, and friendliness attain to honour; for here these are the most useful qualities, and 
almost the only means of supporting the burden of existence. Slave-morality is essentially the 
morality of utility. Here is the seat of the origin of the famous antithesis "good" and "evil": --
power and dangerousness are assumed to reside in the evil, a certain dreadfulness, subtlety, and 
strength, which do not admit of being despised. According to slave-morality, therefore, the "evil" 
man arouses fear; according to master-morality, it is precisely the "good" man who arouses fear 
and seeks to arouse it, while the bad man is regarded as the despicable being. The contrast attains 
its maximum when, in accordance with the logical consequences of slave- morality, a shade of 
depreciation--it may be slight and well-intentioned--at last attaches itself to the "good" man of 
this morality; because, according to the servile mode of thought, the good man must in any case 
be the safe man: he is good-natured, easily deceived, perhaps a little stupid, un bonhomme. 
Everywhere that slave-morality gains the ascendency, language shows a tendency to approximate 
the significations of the words "good" and "stupid."--A last fundamental difference: the desire 
for freedom, the instinct for happiness and the refinements of the feeling of liberty belong as 
necessarily to slave-morals and morality, as artifice and enthusiasm in reverence and devotion 
are the regular symptoms of an aristocratic mode of thinking and estimating.--Hence we can 
understand without further detail why love as a passion--it is our European specialty--must 
absolutely be of noble origin; as is well known, its invention is due to the Provencal poet-
cavaliers, those brilliant, ingenious men of the "gai saber," to whom Europe owes so much, and 
almost owes itself. 
 
261. 
 
Vanity is one of the things which are perhaps most difficult for a noble man to understand: he 
will be tempted to deny it, where another kind of man thinks he sees it self-evidently. The 
problem for him is to represent to his mind beings who seek to arouse a good opinion of 
themselves which they themselves do not possess--and consequently also do not "deserve,"--and 
who yet believe in this good opinion afterwards. This seems to him on the one hand such bad 
taste and so self-disrespectful, and on the other hand so grotesquely unreasonable, that he would 
like to consider vanity an exception, and is doubtful about it in most cases when it is spoken of. 
He will say, for instance: "I may be mistaken about my value, and on the other hand may 
nevertheless demand that my value should be acknowledged by others precisely as I rate it:--that, 
however, is not vanity (but self-conceit, or, in most cases, that which is called 'humility,' and also 
'modesty')." Or he will even say: "For many reasons I can delight in the good opinion of others, 
perhaps because I love and honour them, and rejoice in all their joys, perhaps also because their 
good opinion endorses and strengthens my belief in my own good opinion, perhaps because the 
good opinion of others, even in cases where I do not share it, is useful to me, or gives promise of 
usefulness:--all this, however, is not vanity." The man of noble character must first bring it home 
forcibly to his mind, especially with the aid of history, that, from time immemorial, in all social 
strata in any way dependent, the ordinary man was only that which he passed for:--not being at 
all accustomed to fix values, he did not assign even to himself any other value than that which 
his master assigned to him (it is the peculiar right of masters to create values). It may be looked 
upon as the result of an extraordinary atavism, that the ordinary man, even at present, is still 
always waiting for an opinion about himself and then instinctively submitting himself to it; yet 
by no means only to a "good" opinion, but also to a bad and unjust one (think, for instance, of the 
greater part of the self-appreciations and self-depreciations which believing women learn from 
their confessors, and which in general the believing Christian learns from his Church). In fact, 
conformably to the slow rise of the democratic social order (and its cause, the blending of the 
blood of masters and slaves), the originally noble and rare impulse of the masters to assign a 
value to themselves and to "think well" of themselves, will now be more and more encouraged 
and extended; but it has at all times an older, ampler, and more radically ingrained propensity 
opposed to it--and in the phenomenon of 'vanity" this older propensity overmasters the younger. 
The vain person rejoices over every good opinion which he hears about himself (quite apart from 
the point of view of its usefulness, and equally regardless of its truth or falsehood), just as he 
suffers from every bad opinion: for he subjects himself to both, he feels himself subjected to 
both, by that oldest instinct of subjection which breaks forth in him.--It is "the slave" in the vain 
man's blood, the remains of the slave's craftiness--and how much of the "slave" is still left in 
woman, for instance!--which seeks to seduce to good opinions of itself; it is the slave, too, who 
immediately afterwards falls prostrate himself before these opinions, as though he had not called 
them forth.--And to repeat it again: vanity is an atavism. 
 
262. 
 
A species originates, and a type becomes established and strong in the long struggle with 
essentially constant unfavourable conditions. On the other hand, it is known by the experience of 
breeders that species which receive super-abundant nourishment, and in general a surplus of 
protection and care, immediately tend in the most marked way to develop variations, and are 
fertile in prodigies and monstrosities (also in monstrous vices). Now look at an aristocratic 
commonwealth, say an ancient Greek polis, or Venice, as a voluntary or involuntary contrivance 
for the purpose of rearing human beings; there are there men beside one another, thrown upon 
their own resources, who want to make their species prevail, chiefly because they must prevail, 
or else run the terrible danger of being exterminated. The favour, the super-abundance, the 
protection are there lacking under which variations are fostered; the species needs itself as 
species, as something which, precisely by virtue of its hardness, its uniformity, and simplicity of 
structure, can in general prevail and make itself permanent in constant struggle with its 
neighbours, or with rebellious or rebellion-threatening vassals. The most varied experience 
teaches it what are the qualities to which it principally owes the fact that it still exists, in spite of 
all Gods and men, and has hitherto been victorious: these qualities it calls virtues, and these 
virtues alone it develops to maturity. It does so with severity, indeed it desires severity; every 
aristocratic morality is intolerant in the education of youth, in the control of women, in the 
marriage customs, in the relations of old and young, in the penal laws (which have an eye only 
for the degenerating): it counts intolerance itself among the virtues, under the name of "justice." 
A type with few, but very marked features, a species of severe, warlike, wisely silent, reserved, 
and reticent men (and as such, with the most delicate sensibility for the charm and nuances of 
society) is thus established, unaffected by the vicissitudes of generations; the constant struggle 
with uniform unfavourable conditions is, as already remarked, the cause of a type becoming 
stable and hard. Finally, however, a happy state of things results, the enormous tension is 
relaxed; there are perhaps no more enemies among the neighbouring peoples, and the means of 
life, even of the enjoyment of life, are present in super abundance. With one stroke the bond and 
constraint of the old discipline severs: it is no longer regarded as necessary, as a condition of 
existence--if it would continue, it can only do so as a form of luxury, as an archaising taste. 
Variations, whether they be deviations (into the higher, finer, and rarer), or deteriorations and 
monstrosities, appear suddenly on the scene in the greatest exuberance and splendour; the 
individual dares to be individual and detach himself. At this turning-point of history there 
manifest themselves, side by side, and often mixed and entangled together, a magnificent, 
manifold, virgin-forest-like up-growth and up-striving, a kind of tropical tempo in the rivalry of 
growth, and an extraordinary decay and self-destruction, owing to the savagely opposing and 
seemingly exploding egoisms, which strive with one an other "for sun and light," and can no 
longer assign any limit, restraint, or forbearance for themselves by means of the hitherto existing 
morality. It was this morality itself which piled up the strength so enormously, which bent the 
bow in so threatening a manner:--it is now "out of date," it is getting "out of date." The 
dangerous and disquieting point has been reached when the greater, more manifold, more 
comprehensive life is lived beyond the old morality; the "individual" stands out, and is obliged to 
have recourse to his own law-giving, his own arts and artifices for self-preservation, self-
elevation, and self-deliverance. Nothing but new "Whys," nothing but new "Hows," no common 
formulas any longer, misunderstanding and disregard in league with each other, decay, 
deterioration, and the loftiest desires frightfully entangled, the genius of the race overflowing 
from all the cornucopias of good and bad, a portentous simultaneousness of Spring and Autumn, 
full of new charms and mysteries peculiar to the fresh, still inexhausted, still unwearied 
corruption. Danger is again present, the mother of morality, great danger; this time shifted into 
the individual, into the neighbour and friend, into the street, into their own child, into their own 
heart, into all the most personal and secret recesses of their desires and volitions. What will the 
moral philosophers who appear at this time have to preach? They discover, these sharp onlookers 
and loafers, that the end is quickly approaching, that everything around them decays and 
produces decay, that nothing will endure until the day after to-morrow, except one species of 
man, the incurably mediocre. The mediocre alone have a prospect of continuing and propagating 
themselves--they will be the men of the future, the sole survivors; "be like them! become 
mediocre!" is now the only morality which has still a significance, which still obtains a hearing.--
But it is difficult to preach this morality of mediocrity! it can never avow what it is and what it 
desires! it has to talk of moderation and dignity and duty and brotherly love--it will have 
difficulty in concealing its irony! 
 
263. 
 
There is an instinct for rank, which more than anything else is already the sign of a high rank; 
there is a delight in the nuances of reverence which leads one to infer noble origin and habits. 
The refinement, goodness, and loftiness of a soul are put to a perilous test when something 
passes by that is of the highest rank, but is not yet protected by the awe of authority from 
obtrusive touches and incivilities: something that goes its way like a living touchstone, 
undistinguished, undiscovered, and tentative, perhaps voluntarily veiled and disguised. He whose 
task and practice it is to investigate souls, will avail himself of many varieties of this very art to 
determine the ultimate value of a soul, the unalterable, innate order of rank to which it belongs: 
he will test it by its instinct for reverence. Différence engendre haine: the vulgarity of many a 
nature spurts up suddenly like dirty water, when any holy vessel, any jewel from closed shrines, 
any book bearing the marks of great destiny, is brought before it; while on the other hand, there 
is an involuntary silence, a hesitation of the eye, a cessation of all gestures, by which it is 
indicated that a soul feels the nearness of what is worthiest of respect. The way in which, on the 
whole, the reverence for the Bible has hitherto been maintained in Europe, is perhaps the best 
example of discipline and refinement of manners which Europe owes to Christianity: books of 
such profoundness and supreme significance require for their protection an external tyranny of 
authority, in order to acquire the period of thousands of years which is necessary to exhaust and 
unriddle them. Much has been achieved when the sentiment has been at last instilled into the 
masses (the shallow-pates and the boobies of every kind) that they are not allowed to touch 
everything, that there are holy experiences before which they must take off their shoes and keep 
away the unclean hand--it is almost their highest advance towards humanity. On the contrary, in 
the so-called cultured classes, the believers in "modern ideas," nothing is perhaps so repulsive as 
their lack of shame, the easy insolence of eye and hand with which they touch, taste, and finger 
everything; and it is possible that even yet there is more relative nobility of taste, and more tact 
for reverence among the people, among the lower classes of the people, especially among 
peasants, than among the newspaper-reading demimonde of intellect, the cultured class. 
 
264. 
 
It cannot be effaced from a man's soul what his ancestors have preferably and most constantly 
done: whether they were perhaps diligent economisers attached to a desk and a cash-box, modest 
and citizen-like in their desires, modest also in their virtues; or whether they were accustomed to 
commanding from morning till night, fond of rude pleasures and probably of still ruder duties 
and responsibilities; or whether, finally, at one time or another, they have sacrificed old 
privileges of birth and possession, in order to live wholly for their faith--for their "God,"--as men 
of an inexorable and sensitive conscience, which blushes at every compromise. It is quite 
impossible for a man not to have the qualities and predilections of his parents and ancestors in 
his constitution, whatever appearances. may suggest to the contrary. This is the problem of race. 
Granted that one knows something of the parents, it is admissible to draw a conclusion about the 
child: any kind of offensive incontinence, any kind of sordid envy; or of clumsy self-vaunting--
the three things which together have constituted the genuine plebeian type in all times--such 
must pass over to the child, as surely as bad blood; and with the help of the best education and 
culture one will only succeed in deceiving with regard to such heredity.--And what else does 
education and culture try to do nowadays! In our very democratic, or rather, very plebeian age, 
"education" and "culture" must be essentially the art of deceiving--deceiving with regard to 
origin, with regard to the inherited plebeianism in body and soul. An educator who nowadays 
preached truthfulness above everything else, and called out constantly to his pupils: "Be true! Be 
natural! Show yourselves as you are!"--even such a virtuous and sincere ass would learn in a 
short time to have recourse to the furca of Horace, naturam expellere: with what results? 
"Plebeianism" usque recurret. 
 
265. 
 
At the risk of displeasing innocent ears, I submit that egoism belongs to the essence of a noble 
soul, I mean the unalterable belief that to a being such as "we," other beings must naturally be in 
subjection, and have to sacrifice themselves. The noble soul accepts the fact of his egoism 
without question, and also without consciousness of harshness, constraint, or arbitrariness 
therein, but rather as something that may have its basis in the primary law of things:--if he sought 
a designation for it he would say: "It is justice itself." He acknowledges under certain 
circumstances, which made him hesitate at first, that there are other equally privileged ones; as 
soon as he has settled this question of rank, he moves among those equals and equally privileged 
ones with the same assurance, as regards modesty and delicate respect, which he enjoys in 
intercourse with himself--in accordance with an innate heavenly mechanism which all the stars 
understand. It is an additional instance of his egoism, this artfulness and self-limitation in 
intercourse with his equals--every star is a similar egoist, he honours himself in them, and in the 
rights which he concedes to them, he has no doubt that the exchange of honours and rights, as the 
essence of all intercourse, belongs also to the natural condition of things. The noble soul gives as 
he takes, prompted by the passionate and sensitive instinct of requital, which is at the root of his 
nature. The notion of "favour" has, inter pares, neither significance nor good repute; there may 
be a sublime way of letting gifts as it were light upon one from above, and of drinking them 
thirstily like dew-drops; but for those arts and displays the noble soul has no aptitude. His 
egoism hinders him here: in general, he looks "aloft" unwillingly--he looks either forward, 
horizontally and deliberately, or downwards--he knows that he is on a height. 
 
266. 
 
"One can only truly esteem him who does not look out for himself"--Goethe to Rath Schlosser. 
 
267. 
 
The Chinese have a proverb which mothers even teach their children: "Siao-sin" ("make thy 
heart small"). This is the essentially fundamental tendency in latter-day civilisations. I have no 
doubt that an ancient Greek, also, would first of all remark the self-dwarfing in us Europeans of 
to-day--in this respect alone we should immediately be "distasteful" to him. 
 
268. 
 
What, after all, is ignobleness?--Words are vocal symbols for ideas; ideas, however, are more or 
less definite mental symbols for frequently returning and concurring sensations, for groups of 
sensations. It is not sufficient to use the same words in order to understand one another: we must 
also employ the same words for the same kind of internal experiences, we must in the end have 
experiences in common. On this account the people of one nation understand one another better 
than those belonging to different nations, even when they use the same language; or rather, when 
people have lived long together under similar conditions (of climate, soil, danger, requirement, 
toil) there originates therefrom an entity that "understands itself"--namely, a nation. In all souls a 
like number of frequently recurring experiences have gained the upper hand over those occurring 
more rarely: about these matters people understand one another rapidly and always more rapidly-
-the history of language is the history of a process of abbreviation; on the basis of this quick 
comprehension people always unite closer and closer. The greater the danger, the greater is the 
need of agreeing quickly and readily about what is necessary; not to misunderstand one another 
in danger--that is what cannot at all be dispensed with in intercourse. Also in all loves and 
friendships one has the experience that nothing of the kind continues when the discovery has 
been made that in using the same words, one of the two parties has feelings, thoughts, intuitions, 
wishes, or fears different from those of the other. (The fear of the "eternal misunderstanding": 
that is the good genius which so often keeps persons of different sexes from too hasty 
attachments, to which sense and heart prompt them--and not some Schopenhauerian "genius of 
the species"!) Whichever groups of sensations within a soul awaken most readily, begin to speak, 
and give the word of command--these decide as to the general order of rank of its values, and 
determine ultimately its list of desirable things. A man's estimates of value betray something of 
the structure of his soul, and wherein it sees its conditions of life, its intrinsic needs. Supposing 
now that necessity has from all time drawn together only such men as could express similar 
requirements and similar experiences by similar symbols, it results on the whole that the easy 
communicability of need, which implies ultimately the undergoing only of average and common 
experiences, must have been the most potent of all the forces which have hitherto operated upon 
mankind. The more similar, the more ordinary people, have always had and are still having the 
advantage; the more select, more refined, more unique, and difficult to comprehend, are liable to 
stand alone; they succumb to accidents in their isolation, and seldom propagate themselves. One 
must appeal to immense opposing forces, in order to thwart this natural, all-too-natural 
progressus in simile, the evolution of man to the similar, the ordinary, the average, the 
gregarious--to the ignoble!- 
 
269. 
 
The more a psychologist--a born, an unavoidable psychologist and soul-diviner--turns his 
attention to the more select cases and individuals, the greater is his danger of being suffocated by 
sympathy: he needs sternness and cheerfulness more than any other man. For the corruption, the 
ruination of higher men, of the more unusually constituted souls, is in fact, the rule: it is dreadful 
to have such a rule always before one's eyes. The manifold torment of the psychologist who has 
discovered this ruination, who discovers once, and then discovers almost repeatedly throughout 
all history, this universal inner "desperateness" of higher men, this eternal "too late!" in every 
sense--may perhaps one day be the cause of his turning with bitterness against his own lot, and of 
his making an attempt at self-destruction--of his "going to ruin" himself. One may perceive in 
almost every psychologist a tell-tale inclination for delightful intercourse with commonplace and 
well-ordered men; the fact is thereby disclosed that he always requires healing, that he needs a 
sort of flight and forgetfulness, away from what his insight and incisiveness--from what his 
"business"--has laid upon his conscience. The fear of his memory is peculiar to him. He is easily 
silenced by the judgment of others; he hears with unmoved countenance how people honour, 
admire, love, and glorify, where he has perceived--or he even conceals his silence by expressly 
assenting to some plausible opinion. Perhaps the paradox of his situation becomes so dreadful 
that, precisely where he has learnt great sympathy, together with great contempt, the multitude, 
the educated, and the visionaries, have on their part learnt great reverence--reverence for "great 
men" and marvellous animals, for the sake of whom one blesses and honours the fatherland, the 
earth, the dignity of mankind, and one's own self, to whom one points the young, and in view of 
whom one educates them. And who knows but in all great instances hitherto just the same 
happened: that the multitude worshipped a God, and that the "God" was only a poor sacrificial 
animal! Success has always been the greatest liar--and the "work" itself is a success; the great 
statesman, the conqueror, the discoverer, are disguised in their creations until they are 
unrecognisable; the "work" of the artist, of the philosopher, only invents him who has created it, 
is reputed to have created it; the "great men, as they are reverenced, are poor little fictions 
composed afterwards; in the world of historical values spurious coinage prevails. Those great 
poets, for example, such as Byron, Musset, Poe, Leopardi, Kleist, Gogol (I do not venture to 
mention much greater names, but I have them in my mind), as they now appear, and were 
perhaps obliged to be: men of the moment, enthusiastic, sensuous, and childish, light-minded and 
impulsive in their trust and distrust; with souls in which usually some flaw has to be concealed; 
often taking revenge with their works for an internal defilement, often seeking forgetfulness in 
their soaring from a too true memory, often lost in the mud and almost in love with it, until they 
become like the Will-o'-the-Wisps around the swamps, and pretend to be stars--the people then 
call them idealists,--often struggling with protracted disgust, with an ever-reappearing phantom 
of disbelief, which makes them cold, and obliges them to languish for gloria and devour "faith as 
it is" out of the hands of intoxicated adulators:--what a torment these great artists are and the so-
called higher men in general, to him who has once found them out! It is thus conceivable that it 
is just from woman--who is clairvoyant in the world of suffering, and also unfortunately eager to 
help and save to an extent far beyond her powers--that they have learnt so readily those 
outbreaks of boundless devoted sympathy, which the multitude, above all the reverent multitude, 
do not understand, and overwhelm with prying and self-gratifying interpretations. This 
sympathising invariably deceives itself as to its power; woman would like to believe that love 
can do everything--it is the superstition peculiar to her. Alas, he who knows the heart finds out 
how poor, helpless, pretentious, and blundering even the best and deepest love is--he finds that it 
rather destroys than saves!--It is possible that under the holy fable and travesty of the life of 
Jesus there is hidden one of the most painful cases of the martyrdom of knowledge about love: 
the martyrdom of the most innocent and most craving heart, that never had enough of any human 
love, that demanded love, that demanded inexorably and frantically to be loved and nothing else, 
with terrible outbursts against those who refused him their love; the story of a poor soul 
insatiated and insatiable in love, that had to invent hell to send thither those who would not love 
him--and that at last, enlightened about human love, had to invent a God who is entire love, 
entire capacity for love--who takes pity on human love, because it is so paltry, so ignorant! He 
who has such sentiments, he who has such knowledge about love--seeks for death!--But why 
should one deal with such painful matters? Provided, of course, that one is not obliged to do so. 
 
270. 
 
The intellectual haughtiness and loathing of every man who has suffered deeply--it almost 
determines the order of rank how deeply men can suffer--the chilling certainty, with which he is 
thoroughly imbued and coloured, that by virtue of his suffering he knows more than the 
shrewdest and wisest can ever know, that he has been familiar with, and "at home" in, many 
distant, dreadful worlds of which "you know nothing"!--this silent intellectual haughtiness of the 
sufferer, this pride of the elect of knowledge, of the "initiated," of the almost sacrificed, finds all 
forms of disguise necessary to protect itself from contact with officious and sympathising hands, 
and in general from all that is not its equal in suffering. Profound suffering makes noble: it 
separates.--One of the most refined forms of disguise is Epicurism, along with a certain 
ostentatious boldness of taste, which takes suffering lightly, and puts itself on the defensive 
against all that is sorrowful and profound. They are "gay men" who make use of gaiety, because 
they are misunderstood on account of it--they wish to be misunderstood. There are "scientific 
minds" who make use of science, because it gives a gay appearance, and because scientificness 
leads to the conclusion that a person is superficial--they wish to mislead to a false conclusion. 
There are free insolent minds which would fain conceal and deny that they are broken, proud, 
incurable hearts (the cynicism of Hamlet--the case of Galiani); and occasionally folly itself is the 
mask of an unfortunate over-assured knowledge.--From which it follows that it is the part of a 
more refined humanity to have reverence "for the mask," and not to make use of psychology and 
curiosity in the wrong place. 
 
271. 
 
That which separates two men most profoundly is a different sense and grade of purity. What 
does it matter about all their honesty and reciprocal usefulness, what does if matter about all their 
mutual good-will: the fact still remains--they "cannot smell each other!" The highest instinct for 
purity places him who is affected with it in the most extraordinary and dangerous isolation, as a 
saint: for it is just holiness--the highest spiritualisation of the instinct in question. Any kind of 
cognisance of an indescribable excess in the joy of the bath, any kind of ardour or thirst which 
perpetually impels the soul out of night into the morning, and out of gloom, out of "affliction" 
into clearness, brightness, depth, and refinement:--just as much as such a tendency distinguishes-
-it is a noble tendency--it also separates.--The pity of the saint is pity for the filth of the human, 
all-to-human. And there are grades and heights where pity itself is regarded by him as impurity, 
as Filth. 
 
272. 
 
Signs of nobility: never to think of lowering our duties to the rank of duties for everybody; to be 
unwilling to renounce or to share our responsibilities; to count our prerogatives, and the exercise 
of them, among our duties. 
 
273. 
 
A man who strives after great things, looks upon every one whom he encounters on his way 
either as a means of advance, or a delay and hindrance--or as a temporary resting-place. His 
peculiar lofty bounty to his fellow-men is only possible when he attains his elevation and 
dominates. Impatience, and the consciousness of being always condemned to comedy up to that 
time--for even strife is a comedy, and conceals the end, as every means does--spoil all 
intercourse for him; this kind of man is acquainted with solitude, and what is most poisonous in 
it. 
 
274. 
 
The Problem of Those Who Wait.--Happy chances are necessary, and many incalculable 
elements, in order that a higher man in whom the solution of a problem is dormant, may yet take 
action, or "break forth," as one might say--at the right moment. On an average it does not 
happen; and in all corners of the earth there are waiting ones sitting who hardly know to what 
extent they are waiting, and still less that they wait in vain. Occasionally, too, the waking call 
comes too late--the chance which gives "permission" to take action--when their best youth, and 
strength for action have been used up in sitting still; and how many a one, just as he "sprang up," 
has found with horror that his limbs are benumbed and his spirits are now too heavy! "It is too 
late," he has said to himself--and has become self-distrustful and henceforth for ever useless.--In 
the domain of genius, may not the "Raphael without hands" (taking the expression in its widest 
sense) perhaps not be the exception, but the rule?--Perhaps genius is by no means so rare: but 
rather the five hundred hands which it requires in order to tyrannise over the "the right time"--in 
order to take chance by the forelock! 
 
275. 
 
He who does not wish to see the height of a man, looks all the more sharply at what is low in 
him, and in the foreground--and thereby betrays himself. 
 
276. 
 
In all kinds of injury and loss the lower and coarser soul is better off than the nobler soul: the 
dangers of the latter must be greater, the probability that it will come to grief and perish is in fact 
immense, considering the multiplicity of the conditions of its existence.--In a lizard a finger 
grows again which has been lost; not so in man.-- 
 
277. 
 
It is too bad! Always the old story! When a man has finished building his house, he finds that he 
has learnt unawares something which he ought absolutely to have known before he--began to 
build. The eternal, fatal "Too late!" The melancholia of everything completed!-- 
 
278. 
 
--Wanderer, who art thou? I see thee follow thy path without scorn, without love, with 
unfathomable eyes, wet and sad as a plummet which has returned to the light unsated out of 
every depth--what did it seek down there?--with a bosom that never sighs, with lips that conceal 
their loathing, with a hand which only slowly grasps: who art thou? what hast thou done? Rest 
thee here: this place has hospitality for every one--refresh thyself! And whoever thou art, what is 
it that now pleases thee? What will serve to refresh thee? Only name it, whatever I have I offer 
thee! "To refresh me? To refresh me? Oh, thou prying one, what sayest thou! But give me, I pray 
thee--" What? what? Speak out! "Another mask! A second mask!" 
 
279. 
 
Men of profound sadness betray themselves when they are happy: they have a mode of seizing 
upon happiness as though they would choke and strangle it, out of jealousy--ah, they know only 
too well that it will flee from them! 
 
280. 
 
"Bad! Bad! What? Does he not--go back?" Yes! But you misunderstand him when you complain 
about it. He goes back like every one who is about to make a great spring. 
 
281. 
 
--"Will people believe it of me? But I insist that they believe it of me: I have always thought very 
unsatisfactorily of myself and about myself, only in very rare cases, only compulsorily, always 
without delight in 'the subject,' ready to digress from 'myself,' and always without faith in the 
result, owing to an unconquerable distrust of the possibility of self-knowledge, which has led me 
so far as to feel a contradictio in adjecto even in the idea of 'direct knowledge' which theorists 
allow themselves:--this matter of fact is almost the most certain thing I know about myself. 
There must be a sort of repugnance in me to believe anything definite about myself.--Is there 
perhaps some enigma therein? Probably; but fortunately nothing for my own teeth.--Perhaps it 
betrays the species to which I belong?--but not to myself as is sufficiently agreeable to me." 
 
282. 
 
--"But what has happened to you?"--"I do not know," he said, hesitatingly; "perhaps the Harpies 
have flown over my table."--It some times happens nowadays that a gentle, sober, retiring man 
becomes suddenly mad, breaks the plates, upsets the table, shrieks, raves, and shocks everybody-
-and finally withdraws, ashamed, and raging at himself--hither? for what purpose? To famish 
apart? To suffocate with his memories? To him who has the desires of a lofty and dainty soul, 
and only seldom finds his table laid and his food prepared, the danger will always be great--
nowadays, however, it is extraordinarily so. Thrown into the midst of a noisy and plebeian age, 
with which he does not like to eat out of the same dish, he may readily perish of hunger and 
thirst--or, should he nevertheless finally "fall to," of sudden nausea.--We have probably all sat at 
tables to which we did not belong; and precisely the most spiritual of us, who are most difficult 
to nourish, know the dangerous dyspepsia which originates from a sudden insight and 
disillusionment about our food and our messmates--the after-dinner nausea. 
 
283. 
 
If one wishes to praise at all, it is a delicate and at the same time a noble self-control, to praise 
only where one does not agree--otherwise in fact one would praise oneself, which is contrary to 
good taste:--a self-control, to be sure, which offers excellent opportunity and provocation to 
constant misunderstanding. To be able to allow oneself this veritable luxury of taste and 
morality, one must not live among intellectual imbeciles, but rather among men whose 
misunderstandings and mistakes amuse by their refinement--or one will have to pay dearly for 
it!--"He praises me, therefore he acknowledges me to be right"--this asinine method of inference 
spoils half of the life of us recluses, for it brings the asses into our neighbourhood and friendship. 
 
284. 
 
To live in a vast and proud tranquillity; always beyond ... To have, or not to have, one's 
emotions, one's For and Against, according to choice; to lower oneself to them for hours; to seat 
oneself on them as upon horses, and often as upon asses:--for one must know how to make use of 
their stupidity as well as of their fire. To conserve one's three hundred foregrounds; also one's 
black spectacles: for there are circumstances when nobody must look into our eyes, still less into 
our "motives." And to choose for company that roguish and cheerful vice, politeness. And to 
remain master of one's four virtues, courage, insight, sympathy, and solitude. For solitude is a 
virtue with us, as a sublime bent and bias to purity, which divines that in the contact of man and 
man--in society"--it must be unavoidably impure. All society makes one somehow, somewhere, 
or sometime--"commonplace." 
 
285. 
 
The greatest events and thoughts--the greatest thoughts, however, are the greatest events--are 
longest in being comprehended: the generations which are contemporary with them do not 
experience such events--they live past them. Something happens there as in the realm of stars. 
The light of the furthest stars is longest in reaching man; and before it has arrived man denies--
that there are stars there. "How many centuries does a mind require to be understood?"--that is 
also a standard, one also makes a gradation of rank and an etiquette therewith, such as is 
necessary for mind and for star. 
 
286. 
 
"Here is the prospect free, the mind exalted "--But there is a reverse kind of man, who is also 
upon a height, and has also a free prospect--but looks downwards. 
 
287. 
 
--What is noble? What does the word "noble" still mean for us nowadays? How does the noble 
man betray himself, how is he recognised under this heavy overcast sky of the commencing 
plebeianism, by which everything is rendered opaque and leaden?--It is not his actions which 
establish his claim--actions are always ambiguous, always inscrutable; neither is it his "works." 
One finds nowadays among artists and scholars plenty of those who betray by their works that a 
profound longing for nobleness impels them; but this very need of nobleness is radically 
different from the needs of the noble soul itself, and is in fact the eloquent and dangerous sign of 
the lack thereof. It is not the works, but the belief which is here decisive and determines the order 
of rank--to employ once more an old religious formula with a new and deeper meaning--it is 
some fundamental certainty which a noble soul has about itself, something which is not to be 
sought, is not to be found, and perhaps, also, is not to be lost.--The noble soul has reverence for 
itself.-- 
 
288. 
 
There are men who are unavoidably intellectual, let them turn and twist themselves as they will, 
and hold their hands before their treacherous eyes--as though the hand were not a betrayer; it 
always comes out at last that they have something which they hide--namely, intellect. One of the 
subtlest means of deceiving, at least as long as possible, and of successfully representing oneself 
to be stupider than one really is--which in everyday life is often as desirable as an umbrella,--is 
called enthusiasm, including what belongs to it, for instance, virtue. For as Galiani said, who was 
obliged to know it: vertu est enthousiasme. 
 
289. 
 
In the writings of a recluse one always hears something of the echo of the wilderness, something 
of the murmuring tones and timid vigilance of solitude; in his strongest words, even in his cry 
itself, there sounds a new and more dangerous kind of silence, of concealment. He who has sat 
day and night, from year's end to year's end, alone with his soul in familiar discord and 
discourse, he who has become a cave-bear, or a treasure-seeker, or a treasure-guardian and 
dragon in his cave--it may be a labyrinth, but can also be a gold-mine--his ideas themselves 
eventually acquire a twilight-colour of their own, and an odour, as much of the depth as of the 
mould, something uncommunicative and repulsive, which blows chilly upon every passerby. The 
recluse does not believe that a philosopher--supposing that a philosopher has always in the first 
place been a recluse--ever expressed his actual and ultimate opinions in books: are not books 
written precisely to hide what is in us?--indeed, he will doubt whether a philosopher can have 
"ultimate and actual" opinions at all; whether behind every cave in him there is not, and must 
necessarily be, a still deeper cave: an ampler, stranger, richer world beyond the surface, an abyss 
behind every bottom, beneath every "foundation." Every philosophy is a foreground philosophy-
-this is a recluse's verdict: "There is something arbitrary in the fact that the philosopher came to a 
stand here, took a retrospect, and looked around; that he here laid his spade aside and did not dig 
any deeper--there is also something suspicious in it." Every philosophy also conceals a 
philosophy; every opinion is also a lurking-place, every word is also a mask. 
 
290. 
 
Every deep thinker is more afraid of being understood than of being misunderstood. The latter 
perhaps wounds his vanity, but the former wounds his heart, his sympathy, which always says: 
"Ah, why would you also have as hard a time of it as I have?" 
 
291. 
 
Man, a complex, mendacious, artful, and inscrutable animal, uncanny to the other animals by his 
artifice and sagacity, rather than by his strength, has invented the good conscience in order 
finally to enjoy his soul as something simple; and the whole of morality is a long, audacious 
falsification, by virtue of which generally enjoyment at the sight of the soul becomes possible. 
From this point of view there is perhaps much more in the conception of "art" than is generally 
believed. 
 
292. 
 
A philosopher: that is a man who constantly experiences, sees, hears, suspects, hopes, and 
dreams extraordinary things; who is struck by his own thoughts as if they came from the outside, 
from above and below, as a species of events and lightning-flashes peculiar to him; who is 
perhaps himself a storm pregnant with new lightnings; a portentous man, around whom there is 
always rumbling and mumbling and gaping and something uncanny going on. A philosopher: 
alas, a being who often runs away from himself, is often afraid of himself--but whose curiosity 
always makes him "come to himself" again. 
 
293. 
 
A man who says: "I like that, I take it for my own, and mean to guard and protect it from every 
one"; a man who can conduct a case, carry out a resolution, remain true to an opinion, keep hold 
of a woman, punish and overthrow insolence; a man who has his indignation and his sword, and 
to whom the weak, the suffering, the oppressed, and even the animals willingly submit and 
naturally belong; in short, a man who is a master by nature--when such a man has sympathy, 
well! that sympathy has value! But of what account is the sympathy of those who suffer! Or of 
those even who preach sympathy! There is nowadays, throughout almost the whole of Europe, a 
sickly irritability and sensitiveness towards pain, and also a repulsive irrestrainableness in 
complaining, an effeminising, which, with the aid of religion and philosophical nonsense, seeks 
to deck itself out as something superior--there is a regular cult of suffering. The unmanliness of 
that which is called "sympathy" by such groups of visionaries, is always, I believe, the first thing 
that strikes the eye.--One must resolutely and radically taboo this latest form of bad taste; and 
finally I wish people to put the good amulet, "gai saber" ("gay science," in ordinary language), 
on heart and neck, as a protection against it. 
 
294. 
 
The Olympian Vice. --Despite the philosopher who, as a genuine Englishman, tried to bring 
laughter into bad repute in all thinking minds--"Laughing is a bad infirmity of human nature, 
which every thinking mind will strive to overcome" (Hobbes),--I would even allow myself to 
rank philosophers according to the quality of their laughing--up to those who are capable of 
golden laughter. And supposing that Gods also philosophise, which I am strongly inclined to 
believe, owing to many reasons--I have no doubt that they also know how to laugh thereby in an 
overman-like and new fashion--and at the expense of all serious things! Gods are fond of 
ridicule: it seems that they cannot refrain from laughter even in holy matters. 
 
295. 
 
The genius of the heart, as that great mysterious one possesses it, the tempter-god and born rat-
catcher of consciences, whose voice can descend into the nether-world of every soul, who neither 
speaks a word nor casts a glance in which there may not be some motive or touch of allurement, 
to whose perfection it pertains that he knows how to appear,--not as he is, but in a guise which 
acts as an additional constraint on his followers to press ever closer to him, to follow him more 
cordially and thoroughly;--the genius of the heart, which imposes silence and attention on 
everything loud and self-conceited, which smooths rough souls and makes them taste a new 
longing--to lie placid as a mirror, that the deep heavens may be reflected in them;--the genius of 
the heart, which teaches the clumsy and too hasty hand to hesitate, and to grasp more delicately; 
which scents the hidden and forgotten treasure, the drop of goodness and sweet spirituality under 
thick dark ice, and is a divining-rod for every grain of gold, long buried and imprisoned in mud 
and sand; the genius of the heart, from contact with which every one goes away richer; not 
favoured or surprised, not as though gratified and oppressed by the good things of others; but 
richer in himself, newer than before, broken up, blown upon, and sounded by a thawing wind; 
more uncertain, perhaps, more delicate, more fragile, more bruised, but full of hopes which as 
yet lack names, full of a new will and current, full of a new ill-will and counter-current ... but 
what am I doing, my friends? Of whom am I talking to you? Have I forgotten myself so far that I 
have not even told you his name? Unless it be that you have already divined of your own accord 
who this questionable God and spirit is, that wishes to be praised in such a manner? For, as it 
happens to every one who from childhood onward has always been on his legs, and in foreign 
lands, I have also encountered on my path many strange and dangerous spirits; above all, 
however, and again and again, the one of whom I have just spoken: in fact, no less a personage 
than the God Dionysus, the great equivocator and tempter, to whom, as you know, I once offered 
in all secrecy and reverence my first-fruits--the last, as it seems to me, who has offered a 
sacrifice to him, for I have found no one who could understand what I was then doing. In the 
meantime, however, I have learned much, far too much, about the philosophy of this God, and, 
as I said, from mouth to mouth--I, the last disciple and initiate of the God Dionysus: and perhaps 
I might at last begin to give you, my friends, as far as I am allowed, a little taste of this 
philosophy? In a hushed voice, as is but seemly: for it has to do with much that is secret, new, 
strange, wonderful, and uncanny. The very fact that Dionysus is a philosopher, and that therefore 
Gods also philosophise, seems to me a novelty which is not unensnaring, and might perhaps 
arouse suspicion precisely among philosophers;--among you, my friends, there is less to be said 
against it, except that it comes too late and not at the right time; for, as it has been disclosed to 
me, you are loth nowadays to believe in God and gods. It may happen, too, that in the frankness 
of my story I must go further than is agreeable to the strict usages of your ears? Certainly the 
God in question went further, very much further, in such dialogues, and was always many paces 
ahead of me ... Indeed, if it were allowed, I should have to give him, according to human usage, 
fine ceremonious titles of lustre and merit, I should have to extol his courage as investigator and 
discoverer, his fearless honesty, truthfulness, and love of wisdom. But such a God does not know 
what to do with all that respectable trumpery and pomp. "Keep that," he would say, "for thyself 
and those like thee, and whoever else require it! I--have no reason to cover my nakedness!" One 
suspects that this kind of divinity and philosopher perhaps lacks shame?-- He once said: "Under 
certain circumstances I love mankind"--and referred thereby to Ariadne, who was present; "in 
my opinion man is an agreeable, brave, inventive animal, that has not his equal upon earth, he 
makes his way even through all labyrinths. I like man, and often think how I can still further 
advance him, and make him stronger, more evil, and more profound."--"Stronger, more evil, and 
more profound?" I asked in horror. 'Yes," he said again, "stronger, more evil, and more 
profound; also more beautiful"--and thereby the tempter-god smiled with his halcyon smile, as 
though he had just paid some charming compliment. One here sees at once that it is not only 
shame that this divinity lacks;--and in general there are good grounds for supposing that in some 
things the Gods could all of them come to us men for instruction. We men are--more human.-- 
 
296. 
 
Alas! what are you, after all, my written and painted thoughts! Not long ago you were so 
variegated, young and malicious, so full of thorns and secret spices, that you made me sneeze 
and laugh--and now? You have already doffed your novelty, and some of you, I fear, are ready to 
become truths, so immortal do they look, so pathetically honest, so tedious! And was it ever 
otherwise? What then do we write and paint, we mandarins with Chinese brush, we 
immortalisers of things which lend themselves to writing, what are we alone capable of painting? 
Alas, only that which is just about to fade and begins to lose its odour! Alas, only exhausted and 
departing storms and belated yellow sentiments! Alas, only birds strayed and fatigued by flight, 
which now let themselves be captured with the hand--with our hand! We immortalise what 
cannot live and fly much longer, things only which are exhausted and mellow! And it is only for 
your afternoon, you, my written and painted thoughts, for which alone I have colours, many 
colours, perhaps, many variegated softenings, and fifty yellows and browns and greens and reds;-
-but nobody will divine thereby how ye looked in your morning, you sudden sparks and marvels 
of my solitude, you, my old, beloved--evil thoughts! 
